Seerah of Prophet Muhammed 1 - Specialities of Prophet Muhammed
By Dr. Yasir Qadhi

Lecture Name: Seerah of Prophet Muhammed 1 - Specialities of Prophet Muhammed
Lecture Date: April 27, 2011
Lecturer: Dr Yasir Qadhi
Lecture Place:
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?list=PLAEA99D24CA2F9A8F&v=VOUp3ZZ9t3A
Transcriber:  brother Safwan Khan & Faizan
Transcriber Email: safwan-khan@hotmail.com
Transcript Source: https://arqadhi.blogspot.com/2015/11/001-specialties-of-prophet-muhammad-saw.html



Insh'Allah before we start the seerah to build up even greater eagerness and motivation, we will study the prophet PBUH's specialties.

So where to begin when we describe the one whom Allah has chosen above the entire creation. How is it possible to do justice when Allah says "We have raised up your remembrance and mention". And indeed whenever Allah is mentioned, the prophet SAW is almost always mentioned straight after. When Allah himself called his "rahma-tul-lil-alameen". The embodiment of rahma (mercy). Indeed the prophet PBUH's sending is mercy. His message is mercy. His teachings are mercy. He is everything associated with mercy.

We begin by mentioning some of the names - he had many names. Some scholars wrote up to 250 names for the prophet PBUH.

The name Muhammad is mentioned 4 times in the Quran - the name Ahmad is mentioned 2 or 3 times, on the tounge of Isa AS in the Quran "I am going to tell you of a prophet coming after me - his name is Ahmad". Both names come from "hameda". And "hamd" means to praise - but not any type of praise. But "hamd" means to praise not in return for someone who has done a favour for you, but instead it is the highest possible level of praise. It is praise because he is worthy of being praised simply because of the inherent characteristics of the person. That is, he deserves to be praised for who he is. An object of perfection - he is worthy of praise. And he has these two names: Muhammad and Ahmad, both come form "hamd". Why? Because Allah, the angles, all the prophets, every single one of mankind praises him. Indeed Muslims non stop every second; and non-Muslims alike - they praise his character and qualities. So he is praised by everything in creation. There is no human before, now or after who is praised more than the prophet PBUH.



In a long sahih hadith it's narrated that on the day of judgement, everyone will know that Islam is the truth but of course it is too late to believe now. And so the people will go to Adam AS and tell him "Oh Adam, you are our father and Allah blew his ruh into you, do you not see the situation your children are in?" They will ask him to go to Allah to start the reckoning and ask for forgiveness but he will say "I committed a sin I should not have done and I'm worried about myself" - and so he will say "Naf see" meaning go to another person. Then humanity at larfe will then go to Nuh AS, but he will also say "Allah told me not to ask anybody to be saved, and I asked Him to save my son and I disobeyed him". So Nuh AS is also worried about himself and will say "Naf see". Then they will go to Ibrahim AS will give the same response, that "I made 3 lies" even though they aren't lies but he is just so worried. One of the lies were when he said "the big idol did it" to his people after destroying the idols (where he wasn't lying, but trying to make a point and give dawah). Another was when he said "I am sick" when his people went out of town and he said "I don't want to go with you" - only so he could destroy the idols. And lastly when he called his wife "his sister" i.e. in islam, only to save him from the king. Then all will go to Musa AS who will also make an excuse "I killed someone in anger". Isa AS will also say he is not worthy because of the people that follow the trinity etc. And then they will all go to the prophet PBUH and beg him to be an intercessor and representative to go in front of Allah for all of humanity. To do what?! To begin kyama. Just to begin it. Because the day is so hard they will say "whatever comes let it come - this tension is too much". So they will beg the prophet PBUH and he will say "ana laha ana laha" - this is my job. And because of this all of humanity will praise him. And he will be given "al makaam al mahmood" - the highest station of praise ever.

And to be specific: Ahmad means the highest quality of praise, Muhammad is quantity of praise - and so together its the highest and most continuous praise. Indeed Muhammad was given to Musa because the largest ummah of true Muslims after our ummah is indeed the bani Israel and therefore they were given a name that was fitting to them - because they were a large quantity. But Ahmad was given to Isa because he had a very small nation of true followers but they were very pious and had large quality of faith. They were tortured and persecuted. The Romans killed them - they combed their skin with combs of iron etc. But they were truly devoted. So they were given the name Ahmad.

As to his third name, the prophet PBUH explains it himself: al mahi means to wipe away, and the prophet PBUH says Allah is the one whom through Allah will wipe away kufr. Indeed the Arabian peninsula was immersed in kufr, but within 20-30 years Islam major 60-70 years, Islam reached china and andoloos. Al mahi - the one who erases and defaces kufr.

Al hashir - that mankind will be resurrected at his feet (right after him). this shows the prophet is the signaling of the DOJ. In fact, his sending is the first sign that the DOJ is very close. an al hashir;another interpretation is that he will be the first person to be resurrected and then everyone else thereafter. Indeed the prophets will be resurrected first, then the salehoon and shuhada, and then the rest of the ummah. an al hashir - the one that will signal the DOJ; both by his coming and actual resurrection.

Al aaqib - the successor, the one cuts off, the one comes at the end. and by this it means he is the last prophet.

Nabi-u-rahma- the prophet of tawba (forgiveness).

Nabi-u-tawba - the prophet of tawba and source of repentance. meaning by believing in me and following me people will be forgiven.

Nabi-ul-mulahim - the prophet that will signal lots of trials. and indeed the biggest trails the world will ever see (the dajjal, the three major earthquakes, the coming of the Mahdi and Isa bin Maryam) will occur in this ummah.

Kasaais - something that only he was given and no other prophet was given. His unique characteristics. Some scholars have listed up to 50 unique and specific blessings. Some of these include:

1. (Obviously) He is the final prophet (no prophet has been the final and Allah chose him to be the final: "the seal and the end of the prophets").

2. The prophet hood of the prophet had been decreed even before Adam AS existed; before the ruuh was blown into the mud.

One sahaba asked him: "When were you given prophet hood by Allah". The prophet SAW said "When Adam was between the mud and the ruuh". In other words, Adam was not yet combined with the ruuh and teen! Before the ruuh was blown in Allah had already decreed.

3. Only prophet to have been sent for ALL of humanity - even to the jinn. Someone can say Adam and Nuh were sent for all of humanity. But Adam and Nuh were both exceptions that happened as an expection; in that, Adam was the only human and naturally the only humanity and his children. And the same goes for Nuh: there is only group, nation, community of people in the whole world so it was just a coincidence. its not as if Nuh/Adam were intended to be sent for humanity - its just that is how it happened. and not only this: he was sent to the jinn. "night of the jinn" - Muslim jinns came to mecca.

4. "Allah has helped me with ru'ub - that Allah will inflict into my enemies fear even before I reached them". This is for him only - when he went into battle, people became terrified of him even before he reached them. "Allah struck fear into my enemies for the distance of one entire month".

5. He has been given the largest ummah: in a hadith he said he saw an ummah "as large as the eye can see" and asked "maybe this is my ummah". but he was told "no this is Musa's". And then he saw another ummah even larger than that - blocked his vision and he was told "this is your ummah".

And in another hadith he said to the sahaba "Do you wish your people should be 1/3 of Jannah?". "Would you be happy if i told if your people is 1/2 of Jannah?" They said Allah-ak-bar. The prophet said "my hope is that our ummah will be 2/3 of the people of Jannah!".Subhan'Allah, there is close to 2 billion Muslims on this earth. compare this to all the Muslims who came before! How few must they be?! The actual bani Israel, and followers of Isa etc. So when you look at this iA you can just imagine.

And he is speaking at a time when there are maybe only 1500 Muslims on earth - 2,3 million Christians - thousands of Jews! When he said it, it was a miracle in and of itself.

6. He has been given the most powerful miracle - miracle of the Quran. There is no miracle that compares to the Quran. one thing demonstrates this: look at any other miracle. The splitting of the red sea; when Isa resurrected the dead; but the Quran is a miracle we can recite; indeed the message is the miracle and the miracle is the message. Its a living miracle - there is no miracle that compares to this miracle.

7. The night journey of heavens and earth - no other prophet while alive on earth did such a journey. even when Allah spoke with Musa - it was the divine speech given to Musa while Musa was on earth. But the prophet was the only human to have been called up to the presence of Allah. And the prophet undertook a journey no one else. Even Jibraeel said "this is where it ends for me - I can't go any further".

8. He is the leader of all of humanity. He himself told us this "i am the sayid (the one who is in charge of - the leader) of the children of Adam". Sayid here means he is the master, the perfection of humanity and he deserves to be the leader and indeed he will be the leader on the DOJ.

9. The prophet SAW will be the first to be resurrected - the first to grave to open up when the second trumpet is blown will be the prophets SAW. This explains his name Al-hashir. and he will be the first to be clothed.

10. He will be given the largest howd - a pool which is square in shape. And it is so large that one side of it is as if is from mecca to san'a - which is the entire Arabian peninsula.

11. The kauther - the main river of Jannah and all rivers of Jannah split from that. Its as if the people of Jannah will drink water from the gift of the prophet SAW (surah kauther).

12. He will be the first to cross over the sirat - first to guide his ummah to Jannah - first to knock the doors on Jannah - he will be first human to ever enter - the one on whose name the gates of Jannah will open. the angel will ask "who is it?!" ... "to you I have been commanded to open". so it his name that will be the permission to open up the gates of Jannah. so the very first step to enter into Jannah is the right step of the prophet SAW followed by his ummah (even though we are the last ummah). and we will be asked to enter along with him... even though we are the last chronologically.

13. Allah has blessed him with the highest level of Jannah. al firdois fil a'la. The most pinnacle. Some scholars say the higher up you go, the less the people. Indeed there will be no crowding, but the higher up you go fewer and fewer people will be there. There will come a point where the whole plane of the Jannah is meant for only one person. It will be the greatest Jannah ever made. And it will be immediately underneath the throne of Allah. This is called al-fadheela. The prophet said "this fadheela is a level of Jannah that Allah has chosen for only one of his servants" and then he said modestly "I hope that i am this person". But there is no other human other than him to be qualified for this position.

Even those who mocked him, ridiculed him, drew diagrams will be praising him on the DOJ and in the akhira he will be given al waseela and al fazeela. 
[Transcribed by brother Safwan Khan & Faizan]
safwan-khan@hotmail.com

