(Background Azaan, By Brother Yusuf Islam)

Islamic Research Foundation An International Resource Centre For Understanding And Clarification, On Islam And Comparative Religion. Islamic Research Foundation Provides For Free Hire And Sale, Video And Audio Cassettes, On Islam And Comparative Religion. This Being, The Largest And Best Collection Internationally. It Includes Films, Television Programmes, Documentaries, Qur’anic And Islamic Studies Programmes As Well As Interviews, Lectures, Symposia, Debates, Etc., Of World Renowned Speakers Like Shaikh Ahmed Deedat - South Africa, Dr. Zakir Naik- India, Dr. Jamal Badawi - Canada, Dr. Khalid Al-Mansoor - U.S.A., Brother Yusuf Islam - U.K., Brother Gary Miller - Canada, Dr. Israr Ahmed -Pakistan, Maulana Abdul Karim Parekh- India, And Many Others. Islamic Research Foundation Also Provides On Request, Free Literature On Islam And Comparative Religion. Please Phone, Call, Or Write To Islamic Research Foundation, 56/58, Tandel Street (North), Dongri, Mumbai 400 009.
(Azan Continued….)
-----------------------------
(Dr. Mohammed) Bismillahir Ramanir Rahim. We initiate today’s programme with the Qirat, the recitation from the Holy Qur’an by Brother Ashraf Muhammedy.

(Ashraf Mohammedy) (Arabic)…The translation from Surah Al-Baqarah, Chapter 2 - verse 255. ‘I seek refuge with Allah from satan the accursed.
In the Name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful. Allah, there is no God but He, the Living, the Self Subsisting, Eternal - No slumber can seize Him nor sleep. His are all the things in the heavens and on earth. Who is there can intercede in His presence except as He permits. He knows what appears to His creatures, as before or after, or behind Him. Nor shall they compass aught of His knowledge, except as He wills.

His throne does extend over the heavens and the earth, and He feels no fatigue in the guarding and preserving them, for He is the most High, the Supreme in glory’.

In the Name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful. ‘Say: O people of the Book come to common terms as between us and you. That we worship none but Allah, that we associate no partners with Him. That we erect not from amongst ourselves, Lords and patrons other than Allah.

If then they turn back, say: Bear witness that we at least are Muslims bowing to the will of Allah. Verily Allah has spoken the truth’.

(Dr. Muhammed) Respected brothers and sisters, Assalaam Alaiykum, May peace be upon you. On behalf of the Islamic Research Foundation, I Dr. Muhammad Naik, welcome all of you to today’s programme. As did I, you may too have read, two days back, in the sacred space of ‘The Times of India’, Mumbai, the following verses…And I quote…‘Hold fast all together, to God’s rope and be not divided among yourselves. Remember with gratitude, God’s favour on you, for you were enemies, and He joined your hearts in love - So that by His grace you became brethren. Let there arise out of you, one community, inviting to all that is good, enjoining what is right, and forbidding what is wrong’ - Holy Qur’an, Surah Al Imran, Ch. 3, verses 103 and 104. This quotation aptly represents, the Islamic Research Foundation’s striving for Islamic Dawa’h, the proper presentation, understanding and clarification of the message of Islam, amongst Muslims and Non-Muslims, as well as removing misconceptions about Islam, amongst Muslims and Non-Muslims. Reason, logic, and modern scientific understanding, are the basis of all our presentations. 
Dr. Zakir Naik, A medical doctor by professional training, has devoted himself for analyzing Islam and other religion objectively. To understand and spread the real truth, understanding and clarifications about religion at the way of life.
The IRF office complex has a Video cassette library, a Publication department, a Cable and Satellite Television production studio, an Audio Video Recording department, and a Computer department. It also has a multi purpose Audio Visual reading room, an Auditorium, a Sales Outlet called Islamic Dimensions, a Ladies’ Wing and a Children’s Wing. These provide the much needed facilities and services for understanding the overall excellence of Islam and its proper teachings. The IRF office complex and its facilities are open from 10.00 am to 8.30 p.m. daily, except Fridays. The regular programmes of the IRF include, organizing public lectures, followed by open question and answer sessions like this one today. Symposia, Open forum Interactions and other such programmes, Providing more than 3500 video cassette titles on Islam and comparative religion to the public, on free hire. Free distribution of more than 50 publications on Islam, on request. Distribution of the Holy Qur’an with translation for understanding the message of God, meant for the whole of humankind. Regular interactions internationally on the Internet for presenting the proper message of Islam as well as removing misconceptions about Islam. The IRF also has its own web site for providing information and clarifications about Islam. Through the cable TV relay networks in Mumbai alone, The IRF videocassettes, on Islam reach more than one million homes daily, for approximately 3 hours. The ATN satellite TV channel, telecasts IRF programmes on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays from 6 to 6.30 A.M. Indian Standard Time across 68 countries of the world. The NEPC satellite TV channel and other TV channels too telecast IRF programmes regularly. Dr. Zakir Naik, though a medical doctor by professional training, has devoted himself for analyzing Islam, and other religions objectively to understand and spread the real truth, understanding and clarifications about religion, as a way of life. He is an International orator on Islam and Comparative Religion. In fact in the last one year itself, in addition to his many talks in India, Dr. Zakir has delivered more than 160 public talks abroad, in the United States of America, Canada, the United Kingdom, South Africa, Singapore, Malaysia, Saudi Arabia, Srilanka and Bahrain. He will Inshallah leave, next weekend for a series of public talks in Kuwait. He is acclaimed widely for his logical, reasonable and scientific approach towards his subject. He is appreciated for his comparative knowledge of Hinduism, Judaism, Christianity and Islam, specially for his verbatim quotations from Religious Scriptures. ‘Concept of God in Major Religions’ - Why have we chosen this topic? We not only need to understand and realize what God is, and what are His qualities, but also… and it is very important…we need to know, what God certainly is not.
Brothers and Sisters, to promote better understanding and integration on similarities between religions, as well as living in real harmony along with the differences, the Islamic Research Foundation presents today’s, talk on ‘Concept of God in Major religions’ by Dr. Zakir Naik.

(Dr. Zakir) (Arabic)…Respected Elders and my dear Brothers and Sisters, I welcome all of you with the Islamic greetings, Assalmu Alaikum Wa Rahmatullahi, Wa Barakathu. May Peace, Blessings and Mercy of Almighty God be on all of you. The Non-Muslims may be wondering that, what was I murmuring or uttering in the beginning of my talk. I was not trying to mesmerize you, or hypnotize you, but I was reciting few verses of the Holy Qur’an from Surah Taha, Ch. No. 20, verses No. 25 and 28. When Allah Subhana Wa Taala, Almighty God asks Prophet Moses (peace be upon him) to deliver the message to the Pharoah, Moses (peace be upon him), he prays to Almighty God, Allah Subhana Wa Taala, and recites these verses. (Arabic)…. ‘Oh my Lord expand my breast for me, Expand my center for me, (Arabic)… And make my task easy for me,(Arabic)… And remove the impediment from my speech’. Since we know that Prophet Moses (peace be upon him) was a stamerer, was a stuterer - So he prays to the Almighty God to remove the stamering, to loosen his tongue, as well as remove the barrier, if there is any between him, and the person to whom he is going to deliver the message. If a person is giving a talk, on other religions, those people in the audience who do not belong to that religion, they may think that this person is going to speak against their Religion. For example, if suppose, a Hindu is giving a talk on other Religions, the Non-Hindus may feel that, he is going to speak against my Religion. If a Christian is giving a talk on other Religions, the Non-Christians may feel that, he is going to speak against my religion. Similarly, I being a Muslim, when I am giving a talk on other Religions, the Non-Muslims may feel, that I am going to speak against their Religion. That is the reason, I am praying to Allah Subhana Wa Taala, Almighty God, to loosen my tongue as well as remove the impediment, the barrier - mental or otherwise, if there is any, between me and you. The topic of this morning’s talk is… ‘Concept of God in Major Religions’. ‘Religion’… according to the Oxford Dictionary means…‘A belief in a Super Human controlling power, especially a personal God or gods, that deserve obedience and worship’. The Qari, Brother Ashraf Muhamedy, he recited few verses of the Holy Qur’an from Surah Al Imran, Ch. No.3, V. No. 64, which says…(Arabic)… ‘Say to the people of the book’ (Arabic)… ‘that come to common terms as between us and you’ Which is the first term? (Arabic)…‘that we worship none but Allah’. (Arabic)…‘that we associate no partners with Him’. (Arabic)…‘that we erect not among ourselves, Lords and Patrons, other than Allah’. (Arabic)…‘if then they turn back’. (Arabic)…‘say we bear witness’. (Arabic)… ‘that we are Muslims bowing our will to Allah Subhana Wa Taala’. This is a verse of the Holy Qur’an which shows you a way how to speak with people of different communities. It says : (Arabic)…‘That came to common terms as between us and you’. Which is the first term? (Arabic)….‘That we worship none but Allah’ (Arabic)… ‘that we associate no partners with Him’. One thing common in all the Major Religions of the world is, that the God they worship, they believe He is the same God for them, as well as for the others. For eg… the God which the Hindus worship, they believe He is the same God for the Hindus as well as for the Non-Hindus. The God which the Christians worship, they believe He is the same God, for the Christians as well as for the Non-Christians.
Similarly the God…Allah Subhana Wa Taala which we Muslims worship, we believe He is the same Allah Subhana Wa Taala for the Muslims, as well as for the Non-Muslims. The Major Religions of the world can be broadly classified as : Semetic Religions and Non Semetic Religions. The Non Semetic Religions are further divided into Aryan and the Non Aryan Religions. The Semetic Religions are those Religions that are followed by the Semites. Who are the Semites? The Semites are the descendents of ‘Shem’, who was the son of Prophet Noah (Peace be upon him) which is mentioned in the Bible, in the book Genesis, Ch. No. 5 and Ch.No. 11. So Semetic Religions are those Religions, that are followed by the Jews, by the Arabs, by the Asyrians by the Ponysians - who speak Hebrew, Aramaic, Arabic, Acadians, Ponysians, etc. The major amongst the Semetic Religions are, Judaism, Christianity and Islam - all of which are Prophetic Religions. The Non Sematic Religions are further divided into Aryan and Non-Aryan Religions. The Aryan Religions, are the Religions followed by the Aryans - a group of Indo-European speaking community, which spread in Iran and Northern India, in the 1st half of the 2nd millenium B.C, that is 2000 to 1500 B.C. The Aryan Religion is further divided into Vedic and Non - Vedic Religion. The Vedic religion is ‘Brahaminism’ which has been given the misnomer of Hindusium. The Non-Vedic Religions, are Sikhism, Buddism, Jainism, etc. Amongst the Non-Aryan Religions, we have those of the Chinese origin like ‘Taoism’, ‘Confusism’, etc - those of the Japanese origin, like ‘Shintuism’, etc. But most of these Religions, they do not have a concept of God. Therefore they are preferably called as ethical systems, instead of Religions. As far as my talk today will be concerned, I will be speaking about the Concept of God in Major Religions, of ‘Semetic’ and ‘Aryan’ origin. To understand the concept of God, the best and the most accurate way is to analyze their Religious Scriptures, and understand what it has to speak about God. Trying to analyze the concept of God, by looking at the followers is not always correct, because most of the followers they themselves do not know what their Scripture speaks about God. So let us, analyze today, the concept of God in Major Religions by analyzing their Religious Scriptures. First we will discuss the Aryan Religion. Hinduism is the most popular of all the Aryan religions. And if you ask a common Hindu, that… How many gods does he believe in? Some may say 3, some may say 33, some may say a 1000, while the others may say, 33 crores, 330 million. But if you ask, a Hindu learned man, who knows his Religious Scriptures, he will tell you that a Hindu should actually believe, only in God. The major difference between the common Hindu and the Muslim is that, the common Hindu believes in a Philosophy known as ‘Pantheism’ - that is, everything is god. The tree is god, the sun is god, the moon is god, the snake is god, the monkey is god, the human beings are god. The Muslim believes that everything is God’s - GOD with an Apostofy ‘S’, everything belongs to God. The tree belongs to God, the sun belongs to God, the moon belongs to God, the snake belongs to God, the monkey belongs to God, the human beings belong to God. So the major difference between the common Hindu and the Muslim, is the Apostofy ‘S’. The Hindus say, everything is God, and we Muslims say everything is God’s - God with a Apostofy ‘S’. If we can solve this difference of Apostofy ‘S’, the Hindus and the Muslims will be united. How do you do it? As the Qur’an says… (Arabic)….. ‘That come to common terms as between us and you’. Which is the first term? (Arabic)…‘that we worship none but Allah’, (Arabic)… ‘that we associate no partners with Him’. So let us analyze the concept of God in Hinduisum, by analyzing their Religious Scriptures. The most popular amongst all the Hindu Religious Scriptures, is the ‘Bhagwat Geeta’. This is a copy of Bhagwat Geeta - In the IRF we have Alhamdulillah, more than 30 different translations only of Bhagwat Geeta. The Bhagwat Geeta says in Ch. No. 7, V. No.20 ‘That those whose intelligence has been stolen by material desires, they worship the demi gods’ - That means the materialistic people, they worship demi gods - That means not the true Almighty God. The Upanishads are the other Sacred Scriptures of the Hindus. It is mentioned in the Chandogya Upanishad, Ch.No. 6, Section No. 2, Verse No.1. ‘God is one only… ‘Akam Avidetuim’… not a second’ That means - There is only God, He doesn’t have any partner, He is alone. Same as the Holy Qur’an which is mentioned in Surah Ikhlas, Ch. No. 112, V. No.1, (Arabic)… ‘Say He is Allah, one and only’. It is mentioned in the Sweta Sutara Upanishad, Ch. No. 6, Verse No.9, ‘Na Kasia Kasji Janita Nakadipa’, which means….‘Of Him there is no parents, nor Lord’ He has got no parents, He has got no masters - That means, He alone is sufficient, He is not dependent on anyone else. As the Holy Qur’an says in Surah Ikhlas, Ch. No.112, V. No.3, (Arabic)…‘He begets not nor is He begotten’ The quotation I gave from ‘Upanishads’, was translated by S. Radha Krishnan, and we have other translations also in our foundation. Further, if you read in the Sweta Sutara Upanishads, Ch. No. 4, V. No. 19, it says …‘Natastiya Pratima Asti’ ‘There is no likeness of Him’.
Same as the Holy Qur’an, Surah Iklas, Ch. No. 112, Verse No. 4 (Arabic)… ‘There is nothing like Him’. It is further mentioned in the next verse of the Sweta Sutara Upanishads, Ch.No.4 Verse No. 20, that… ‘His form cannot be seen, No one can see Him with the eyes’. Similar to the message that is given in the Holy Qur’an in Surah Anam, Ch.No.6, V.No.103…‘No vision can grasp Him, but He grasps all vision, He is beyond comprehension, yet He is acquainted with all things’. Amongst all the Religious Scriptures of the Hindus, the most sacred are the Vedas, and there are principally 4 Vedas - the Rigved, the Ajurved, the Samved, and the Atharvaved. The Rigved deals with ‘Songs of praises’; the Ajurved deals with ‘Sacrificial formulas’, the Samved with Melody, and the Atharvaved with Magical formulas. It is mentioned in the Ajurved, Ch. No. 32, Verse No. 3…‘Natasti Pratima Asti’ - There is no image of Him. And verse continues and says that ‘He is unborn, and He should be worshipped’. It is mentioned in the Yasjurved, Ch. No. 40, V. No.8 that ‘God in bodyless and Pure’. It is mentioned in the Ajurved, Ch.No. 40, V.No.9,… ‘Andasma Pravishanti Ya Sambaiti Upaste’, which means – ‘They are entering darkness those who worship the Asambuti’. The ‘Asambuti’ are the natural things like air, water, fire. And the verse continues…“they are sinking more in darkness, those who worship the ‘Sambuti’ ”. The ‘Sambuti’ are the ‘created things’. The quotation I gave of Ajurved, was by Devichand as well as by Ralfh.T. Grefith. The other Veda is the ‘Atharvaved’. It is mentioned in Atharveda, Book No. 20, Ch. No. 58, Verse No. 3 - It says ‘Dev Maha Osi’… ‘God is verily great’. Same as ‘Allah-o-Akbar’ - Allah is the Greatest. Amongst all the Vedas the most sacred and the oldest, is the Rigveda. It is mentioned in the Rigved, Book. No. 1, Hymn No. 164, Verse No. 46…‘Sages call one God by many names’.
That means, there are various names given to this one God, and the Rigved alone gives no less than 33 different attributes to Almighty God - most of which are mentioned in Rigved, Book. 2, Hymn No. 1. And one of the beautiful attribute which is mentioned on Rigved of the Almighty God is ‘Brahama’, which is mentioned in Rigved, Book No. 2, Hymn No.1, Verse No.3. ‘Brahama’ means, ‘The Creator’. If you translate into Arabic, it means ‘Khalique’. We Muslims have got no objection if anyone calls Almighty God, Allah Subhana Wa Taala as ‘Khalique’, or ‘Creator’ or ‘Brahama’. But if someone says that ‘Brahama’ is Almighty God, who has got four heads, and on each head is a crown and he has got four arms, we Muslim take strong objection to it. Moreover, it is even prohibited in the Ajurved, Ch. No. 32, Verse No. 3, which says… ‘Natastya Pratima Asti’- There is no image of Him. Another beautiful attribute, which is given in the Rigved, Book No. 2, Hymn No.1, Verse No. 3, is ‘Vishnu’. ‘Vishnu’ means ‘The Sustainer’. If you translate into Arabic, it means ‘Rab’. We Muslim have got no objection of someone calls Almighty God as ‘Rab’ or ‘Cherisher’, ‘Sustainer’ or ‘Vishnu’. But if someone says that ‘Vishnu’ is Almighty God, who has got 4 hands, and one of his right hand holds the ‘Chakra’ that is the diskettes, and one of his left hand holds the conch and he is riding on a bird, or reclining on a couch of snakes, we Muslims take strong objection to it. You are going against the Ajurved, Ch. No. 40, V.No.8, which says
‘God is bodyless’- as well as Upanishads, Ch. No. 4, Verse No. 19, of Sweta Satra Upanishad, which says: ‘Natastya Pratima Asti’…‘There is no likeness of Him’. It is mentioned in the Rigveda Book. No. 8, Hymn No. 1, Verse No. 1 ‘Maach dangadi Samshata’ - that means… ‘Do not worship anyone besides Him alone - Praise Him alone’. It is mentioned in the Rigved, Book No. 5, Ch. No. 81, Verse No. 1, - it says ‘Verily great is the glory of the Divine Creator’ Same as Surah Fatihah, Ch.No. 1, V.No.2…‘Alhamdulillah hi Rab ul Alameen’… ‘Praise be to Allah (swt) the Lord of the worlds’. It is further mentioned in Rigved, Book No. 3, Hymn No. 34, Verse No.1, - it says that… ‘He is the Bountiest Giver’. It is further mentioned in the Ajurved, Ch.No.40, V.No. 16 - It says that… ‘Lead us to the good path, and save us from the sin which makes us wander and go astray’. Similar to the verse Holy Qur’an of Surah Fathiha Ch. No.1, Verse No.6 and 7, (Arabic…..) That…‘Show us the straight path, the path of those who have earned thine favour, And the path of those who go not astray’ It is mentioned in Rigved Book, No. 6, Hymn No. 45, Verse No. 16… ‘Ya ekt it mustihi’ - ‘Praise Him who is Matchless and Alone’. The quotation I gave from the RigVed was by Satya Prakash Narayan and Satyakam Vidyalankar, as well as by Ralph.T.Grifith, Vol. I and Vol. II. We have various translations of Religious Scriptures of various Religions. So whatever quotations we give, if any one wants to verify that the speaker is pulling a fast one, they are most welcome to come to our foundation and take a Photostat copy. And all these translations which I gave to you is not done by Muslims – It is done by the people who follow that religion, as well as by Orientalists. The ‘Brahma Sutra’ of Hinduism, of the Vedanta - the main cream is, ‘Akkum Braham Dusta Nastim - Niya nastim Kincham’ ‘Bagwan Ek hi hai, dhusra nahi hai, nahi hai, nahi hai, zara bhi nahi hai’. There is only one God, not a second one, not at all, not all, not in the least bit. So if you read the Hindu Scriptures, you will understand the concept of God, in Hinduism. Let us discuss the concept of God in Sikhism. Sikhism is a Non Semetic, Aryan Non Vedic Religion. Though it has a small following, as compared to the other major Religions, it is an offshoot of Hinduism. Sikhism was founded by Guru Nanak Sahib, at the end of the 15th century, and it originated from the area of Pakistan and North West India, that is Punjab, the land of the five rivers. And this religion which was founded by Guru Nanak Sahib - it is a Religion of 10 gurus. The first one who founded the Religion, is Guru Nanak Sahib, and the last and the 10th one is Guru Govind Sahib. Guru Nanak Sahib was born in a ‘Shatriya’ warrior caste family, but he was very much influenced by the Muslims. ‘Sikh’ is derived from the word ‘Sisya’ which means a ‘disciple’ or ‘follower’, and the sacred book of the ‘Sikhs’, is Sri Guru Granth Sahib - this is a book ‘Sri Guru Granth Sahib’. And the Sikh has to maintain his five ‘Ks’ . The first ‘K’ is the ‘Kash’, the uncut hair which all the gurus kept, the second is the ‘Kanga’, the comb which is used to keep the hair clean, the third is the ‘Kadha’, the metal or the steel bangel used for strength and for self restrain, the fourth is the ‘Kripan’, the dagger which is used for self defence, and the fifth is the ‘Kacha’ the long under wear till knee length, or under dross which is used for agility - These 5 ‘Ks’ also help in identifying any Sikh. The best definition that any Sikh can give regarding the concept of Almighty God in Sikhism, is quote the ‘Mul Mantra’ - the fundamental creed of Sikhism, which occurs in the beginning of Shri Guru Granth Sahib…at the beginning, i.e. of Shri Guru Granth Sahib, Volume No.1, Ch. No.1,Verse No.1. It is also called as ‘Japoji Mulmatra’ - It says that… ‘Only one God exists’. And He is called by ‘Dadru’, - the ‘Creator’, ‘the One free from fear and hatred’, ‘the Immortal, ‘Not begotten’, ‘Self-Existing’ ‘Great and Compassionate’. Sikhism strictly believes in Monotheism. And Almighty God, in the unmanifest form is called as ‘Ek Omkara’ and in the manifest form, He is called as ‘Ek Omkara’. And Guru Granth Sahib, he gave various attributes to this manifest form of Almighty God, ‘Omkara’ - and called it also as ‘Kartar’… the Creator, ‘Akal’… the Eternal, ‘Satyanama’… the Holy One, ‘Sahib’… the Lord, ‘Parvadigar’…‘Cherisher’, ‘Rahim’… the Merciful, ‘Karim’…‘the Benevolent’, and he also called Him as ‘Wahe Guru’… ‘One true Lord, one true God’. Sikhism besides believing in Monotheism, it is also against ‘Avtarvada’- the concept of incarnation of God. They are against that God can take human forms… can incarnate - and they are also against idol worship. Guru Nanak, was very much influenced by Sant Kabir - No wonder, if you read the ‘Guru Granth Sahib’, several chapters contain many couplets… ‘Do has’ of Sant Kabir. And one the most famous ‘Dohas’ of Sant Kabir is…‘Dukh mein sumren sab kare, Sukh mein kare na koi. Jo sukh mein sumren kare, to dukh kahe hoi’. ‘Everyone remembers God during trouble - no one remembers Him during peace and happiness. The one who remembers him during peace and happiness, why will he have trouble?’ A similar message is given in the Holy Qur’an, in a Surah Ar Zumar, Ch. 39, Verse No. 8…‘that Man, when trouble touches him, he cries out to the Lord and repents to Him, and when the Lord bestows him from His mercy, the man forgets that he had prayed and cried - and he associates rivals to Allah Subhana Wa Taala. Let us discuss the concept of God, in ‘Zorastarnism’. ‘Zorastarnism’ is a Non Semetic, Aryan Non-Vedic Religion, which is not associated with Hinduism, and it is a ‘Prophetic’ Religion. Zorastrianism is also called as ‘Parisism’, and it was founded by Prophet Zoraster. It is an ancient religion of Persia about 2 1/2 thousand years old, and their Sacred Scriptures are, the ‘Dasatir’ and ‘Awesta’. The ‘Dasatir’ can be further divided into ‘Khurdadasateer’ or ‘Kalan Dasater’. And the ‘Awasta’ can be further divided into the ‘Kurdha Awasta’ or ‘Kalan Awesta’ - The Maha Avesta or the ‘Zendth Awasta’. This is a copy of the ‘Awasta’ - One of the volumes of ‘Avasta’ and there are various other translations of the ‘Awasta’ present in Islamic Research Foundation. The Zorastrians… the Parsis, they call Almighty God as ‘Ahora Mazda’. ‘Ahora’ means ‘the Lord’ … ‘God’, ‘Mazda’ means ‘Wise’. ‘Ahora Mazda’ means ‘the Wise Lord’ or ‘the Wise God’, and He has been given several attributes and names in the ‘Dasatir’. For example, - ‘He is the only One, He has no beginning, no origin, and no end - He has no father, no mother, no wife, no son. He has got no image - He is beyond imagination. There is nothing like Him - No vision can see Him. He is beyond comprehension. He is closer to you than yourself’. There are also other attributes given to Almighty God, in the ‘Awastha’. The other Sacred Scripture of the Parsis. It is mentioned in the ‘Awastha’, in the ‘Kathas’, and the ‘Yasnas’, He is called as the Creator, in Yasna, Ch. No.31, Verse No.7 and 11, and also in other places in Yasna, Ch. No. 44, Verse No.7, Ch. No. 50, Verse No.11, Ch.No. 51, Verse No.7. In several places He is called as the ‘Creator’. He is also referred as ‘the Mightiest’, ‘the Greatest’. In Yasna Ch. No. 33, Verse No.11, as well as in Ch.No. 45, Verse No.6, He is referred to as the ‘Beneficent’. In the Yasna Ch. No. 33, Verse No.11, as well as in Yasna, Ch.No.48, Verse No.3, He is referred to as the ‘Bountiest’. No less than seven times only, in Yasna Ch. No. 43, Verse 4,5,7,9,11,13 and 15. He is also referred as the ‘Bountiest’. In other places of Yasna, Ch. No.44, Verse.No.2, Ch. No. 45, Verse No.5, Ch. No. 46, Verse 9, as well as Ch. No. 48, Verse No.3, He is referred to as the ‘Bontiest’ several times. So if you read the Scriptures of the Parsis, you will understand the correct concept of Almighty God in Parsism… in Zorastarism. Now let us discuss the Sematic Religions. Major Sematic Religons are : Judaism, Christianity and Islam. First, we will discuss about the concept of God, in Judaism. It is mentioned in the Old Testament - Moses (pbuh) says in the book of Deuteronomy, Ch. No. 6, V.No. 4, ‘Shama Israelo Adna ilahaina adna ikat’. It is a Hebrew quotation which means… ‘Hear oh Israel, the Lord our God, is one Lord’. That means… ‘God is One and Only’. It is further mentioned in the book of Isaiah Ch.No.43, V.No.11…‘I, even I, am Lord and besides Me there is no Savior’. In the book Isaiah, Ch.No. 45, V.No.5…‘I am Lord, and there is none else, and I am God, besides Me, who there is no one. In the book of Isaiah, Ch.No. 46, V.No 9, it says…‘I am Lord, and there is none else - I am God, and there is nothing like Me’. It is further mentioned in the Book ‘Exodus’, Ch. No.20, V.No.3 to 5. It says that… God Almighty says in the scriptures - ‘Thou shall have no other Gods besides Me’. Thou shall make unto thee no graven image of any likeness, of anything that is in the heavens above, that is in the earth beneath, and that is in the water under the earth. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor serve them, for I the Lord, the God, is a jealous God.’ Same message is repeated in the book of Deuteronomy, Ch.No. 5, V.No.7 to 9, that…‘Thou shall have no other gods besides Me. Thou shall not make thee any graven image, of any likeness, of anything that is the heavens above, that is in the earth beneath, and in the water beneath the earth. Thou shall not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them for I the Lord, the God am a jealous God’. So if you read the Old Testament, you will understand the concept of God in Judaism - it believes only in one God, and is totally against idol worship. Before we discuss ‘the concept of God in Christianity’, I would like to make a few points clear. Islam is the only Non-Christian faith, which makes it an article of faith to believe in Jesus (peace be upon him). No Muslim, is ‘a Muslim’ if he does not believe in Jesus (peace be upon him). We believe that he was one of the mightiest messengers of Allah Subhana Wa Taalah - of Almighty God. We believe that he was born miraculously, without any male intervention, which many modern day Christians do not believe. We believe that he gave life to the dead with God’s permission. We believe that he healed those born blind, and lepers with God’s permission. The Christians and Muslims, we are going together hand in hand, but there are parting of ways. There are many Christians who say that ‘Jesus Christ (peace be upon him), he was Almighty God, he himself claimed Divinity’. Infact, if you read the Bible, there is not a single uneqvivocable statement in the whole Bible, where Jesus (peace be upon him) himself says, that ‘I am God’, or where he says ‘Worship me’. I would like to repeat that statement that there is not a single uneqvivocable statement in the complete Bible, where Jesus (peace be upon him) himself says that… ‘I am God’ or, where he says… ‘Worship me’. Infact if you read the Bible it is mentioned in the Gospel of John, Ch.No. 14, V.No.28, Jesus (peace be upon him) said – ‘My Father is greater than I’ In the Gospel of John, Ch. No.10, V.No. 29 ‘My father is greater than all’. In the Gospel of Mathew Ch.No.12 V.No.28 “I cast out devil with Sprit of God’. Gospel of Luke, Ch. No. 11 V.No.20 “I with the finger of God, cast out devils’. Gospel of John, Ch.No.5 V.No.30 ‘I can of my own self do nothing - as I hear I judge, and my judgement is just, because I seek not my will, but the will of thy Father, who has sent me’. He never claimed Divinity. Infact he came to testify the pervious law. And he mentions in the Gospel of Mathew Ch.5 V.17 to Verse No. 20, ‘Think not that I am come to destroy the law and the Prophets - I am come not to destroy, but to fulfill. For verily I say unto you, till the heaven and earth pass, one jot or one title shall not pass away from the law, untill all be fulfilled. And whosoever therefore, shall break one of the least commandments and teach men to do so, will be called least in the Kingdom of Heaven. And whosoever shall keep them, and teach them so, the same shall be called great in the Kingdom of Heaven. For verily, unless your righteousness exceeds the righteousness of the Scribes and the Pharasees, in no way shall you enter the Kingdom of Heaven. So Jesus Christ (peace be upon him) said, ‘that If you people want to enter Heaven, you have to keep each and every commandment of Prophet Moses (peace be upon him). You have to follow each and every law given in the Old Testament, including the verses I quoted earlier that ‘there is one God, and you should not do idol worship, you should not make any graven image of Him’. Jesus (peace be upon him), he never said that he was God. Infact he said ‘He was sent by God. He was a Prophet of God’. It is mentioned in the Gospel of John, Ch.No. 14, V.No.24, ‘The words that you hear, are not mine, but it is my Father’s, who has sent me’. Gospel of John, Ch.No. 17, V.No.3 ‘This is eternal life, so that you may know there is one true God, and Jesus Christ, who Thou has sent’. And it is mentioned in the Gospel of Mathew, Ch.No.19, V.No.16 and 17, that one of the persons approaches Jesus (pbuh), and says ‘Good Master, what good things shall I do, that I shall attain eternal life’. Jesus (peace be upon him) replies in V.No.17 of Gospel of Mathew, Ch.No.19 – ‘And Jesus said upto him, ‘Why thou callest me good? For there is none good, except One, that is God - And if you want to enter life, keep the commandments’. Jesus (peace be upon him) never said that if you want to go to heaven, you consider me as Almighty God. He never said that you believe that I will die for your sins – In fact he said, ‘You keep the commandments’. It is further mentioned in the book of Acts, Ch.No. 2 V.No.22 “O men of Israel, hear this, Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved by God, amongst you, by miracles, and wonders and signs, which God did by him, in your presence, and you were witness’. It says, ‘Jesus of Nazareth a man approved by God, by miracles and wonders, which God did by him’. And when Jesus (peace be upon him) was asked, that ‘which is the first of the commandments’? he repeated verbitem what was said earlier by Moses (peace be upon him). It is mentioned in the Gospel of Mark, Ch. No. 12, V.No. 29, he said ‘Shama Israelo, Ada Ilahaino Ada Ihad’ It is a Hebrew quotation which means, ‘Hear Oh Israel, the Lord our God, is in one lord’. So if you read the Bible, you will understand the concept of God, in Christianity. It reminds me of an incident where Maulana Rahmatullah Karanvi - he was having a discussion with a Christian missionary, who was trying to prove to Maulana Shahib that ‘Jesus Christ (peace be upon him) is God Almighty, and that Jesus (peace be upon him) died for the sins of human beings’. After a great deal of time, without any results, the discussion was continued. Later on, the servant of Maulana Shahib, he comes and whispers something in the Maulana’s ears. The Maulana’s face becomes sad - he starts crying. The Christian missionary asks, ‘Maulana Shahib, ‘what is the bad news?’. The Maulana Shahib said in a very sad tone, ‘My servant, he just gave me information, - he brought news, that Arch Angel Gabriel - he died’. The Christian missionary began to laugh loudly. ‘Maulana Shahib, you being such an intelligent person, how can you believe in such absurd things - Can Angels die?’ The Maulana Shahib said, ‘When God can die, why can’t Angels die?’ And the Christian missionary, without speaking a single word, he left – It is a battle of wits. Lets discuss – ‘The Concept of Almighty God in Islam’. The best answer that any one can give you, regarding ‘the Concept of Almighty God in Islam’, is quote to you the Surah of the Holy Qur’an, Surah Ikhlas, Ch.No. 112, V.No. 1 to 4, which says… (Arabic)…. ‘Say He is Allah, One and only’. (Arabic)… ‘Allah the Absolute and Eternal’. ‘As-Samad’ is a bit difficult to translate - It means, that ‘He exists’, and ‘He has created things, when nothing existed’. Everything and every person is dependent on Him, but he is not dependent on any person, or anything. ‘As Samad’ – ‘The Absolute and Eternal’ (Arabic….) ‘He begets not, nor is He begotten’,(Arabic….) ‘There is nothing like Him’. This is a four line definition of Allah Subhana Wa Talaah, which is the touch stone of Theology - Surah Iklas, is the touch stone of Theology. ‘Theo’ in greek means God – ‘Logy’ mean study. ‘Theology’ means study of God. Surah Ikhlas is the touchstone of Theology. If anyone wants to purchase or sell any of their gold jeweleries, first they will evaluate their gold jewellery - And for that, they will go to a goldsmith.And the goldsmith, he takes your gold jewelry and he rubs it against a touchstone. And he compares the colour with samples of gold which he has rubbed at the side, and then tells you, whether its 24 Karat gold, whether its 22 Karat gold, or whether it is not gold at all - It may be fake gold, because all that glitters is not gold. Surah Ikhlas is the touchstone of Theology – It is a four line definition, if you apply to any candidate, who says that ‘He is Almighty God’, and if he fits in this definition, we Muslims have got no objection, in accepting that candidate as Almighty God. It is a touchstone – It is the acid test to decipher, whether the person that anyone claims - whether he is Almighty God or not – It is the acid test – It is the touchstone - Four line definition. Arabic…. ‘Say He is Allah One and Only’. Arabic…. ‘Allah the Absolute and Eternal’. Arabic….. ‘He begets not nor is He begotten’. Arabic…. ‘There is nothing like Him’. It is a four line definition - Anyone claiming to be Almighty God - if that candidate fits in this four line definition, we Muslims have got no objection in accepting that candidate as Almighty God. For example, some people say, that Bhagwaan Rajnesh, Osho Rajnesh - he is Almighty God. I would like to make it very clear, I said – ‘Some people say Bhagwan Rajneesh is God - Not Hindus say Bhagwaan Rajneesh is God’. Because once during question answer time, there was a Hindu gentlemen, who came and told me that we Hindus don’t believe in Bhagwaan Rajneesh, as God. I have read the Hindu Scriptures - I know that the Hindu Scriptures don’t call Bhagwaan Rajneesh as God. I said ‘Some people call him God’ - and Rajnesh has got followers from various different Religions. Lets put him to test of the touchstone of Theology - Surah Ikhlaas. The first is, Arabic…. ‘Say He is Allah One and Only’. Is Rajneesh one and only? We know that there we have several such fake godmen - especially in our country India. He is not one and only. But there may be some people who are diciples of Rajneesh and say ‘No.. No... Rajneesh is one and only’. Okay, lets go to the second test – (Arabic)…. ‘Allah, the Absolute and Eternal’. Is Rajneesh Absolute and Eternal? We know from his biography, that he was suffering from Diabetics, from Ashthama, from Chronic backache. And he alleged that the American government, they gave him slow poisoning - Imagine, God being poisoned. The third test is ‘Arabic…. ‘He begets not, nor is He begotten’. We know that Rajneesh had parents - He had a mother and father. He was born in Jabalpur in Madhya Pradesh, in India. But he was a very intelligent person - Later on, his parents became his own diciples. And in the year 1981, Rajneesh - he goes to America and in Oregon, he establishes his own town and calls it ‘Rajneeshpuram’ - He took America for a ride. Later on the American government, they arrested him and put him in jail, and later on kicked him out the country. In 1985 when he was kicked out from America, he comes back to India, and in Poona, he starts ‘Rajneesh Neo Sanyaas Commune’,. which later on he called it as ‘Osho Commune’. And when you go to Poona in the ‘Osho Commune’, its mentioned on his tomb stone – ‘Osho - , never born, never died, but visited the Earth, from the eleventh of December 1931, to the nineteenth of January 1990’. They forgot to mention, that he was not given visas to 21 different countries - Imagine Almighty God visiting the Earth and he requires visas. And the Archbishop of Greece said that ‘if you don’t deport Rajneesh, we will burn his house, and the house of his disciples. And the last test … (Arabic)…It is so stringent - its impossible for anyone besides Allah Subhana Wa Taala, the true Almighty God, to pass. It says ‘There is nothing like Him’. The moment you can imagine, the moment you can draw a mental picture what God is, - he is not God. We know that Rajneesh, he was a human being like you and me. He had one head, two hands, two legs, two eyes, one nose, one mouth, long flowing beard, long hair - So surely, he can’t be Almighty God. Arabic…. ‘There is nothing like Him’. And this test – (Arabic)….is so stringent, that no one besides Allah Subhana Wa Taala, can pass.Suppose someone says that Arnold Swarzneggar - You know Arnold Swarzneggar? - The person who is known as the strongest man in the world - He was given the title – ‘Mr. Universe’. If suppose, someone says that ‘Almighty God is a thousand times as strong as Arnold Swarzeneggar’. The moment you can compare God to anyone, whether it be Arnold Swarzeneggar, whether it be Dara Singh or King Kong, - whether it be a thousand times or a million times, - the moment you can compare Almighty God to anyone, he is not Almighty God. Arabic… ‘There is nothing like Him’. This is a four line definition given in the Holy Qur’an – ‘Surah Ikhlas’, which is the touchstone of Theology. We Muslims, we prefer calling Allah Subhana Wa Taala, by the Arabic name ‘Allah’, instead of the English word ‘God’ - because, the Arabic word ‘Allah’ it is pure, Its unique. Where as the English word ‘God’, it can be played around with, You can play around with that word. If you add a ‘s’ to ‘God’, it becomes ‘Gods’ - plural of God. There is nothing ‘Plural Allah’, in Islam. Arabic… ‘Say: He is Allah, One and Only.If you add a ‘dess’ to ‘God’, it becomes ‘goddess’ - a female God. There is nothing like ‘Male Allah’, or ‘Female Allah’, in Islam. Allah is Unique, - He has got no gender. If you add a ‘father’ to ‘God’, it becomes ‘Godfather’ - He’s my Godfather - he’s my Guardian. There is nothing like ‘Allah Father’ in Islam, or ‘Allah Abba’ in Islam. If you add a ‘Mother’ to God, it becomes ‘Godmother’. There is nothing like ‘Allah Mother’ or ‘Allah Ammi’ in Islam. Allah is a Unique word - It’s a pure word. If you prefix a ‘tin’ before ‘God’, it becomes ‘tin God’. There is nothing like ‘Tin Allah’ in Islam. That’s the reason we Muslims, we prefer calling Allah Subhana Wa Taala by the Arabic word, ‘Allah’ instead of the English word ‘God’. But if some Muslims, - if they use this word whilst speaking to Non – Muslims, I have got no objections, because Non - Muslims may not know what’s the concept of ‘Allah’. So if any one uses ‘God’ for ‘Allah’, I’ve got no objection - But the more appropriate word is ‘Allah’. Otherwise, the Holy Qu’ran says in Surah Isra, Ch. no. 17, Verse No. 110… (Arabic)…‘Say: call upon him by Allah or by Rahmaan - By whichever name you call upon Him, it is well - To him belongs the most beautiful names. You can call Allah Subhana Wa Taala by any name - But it should be a beautiful name - It should not conjure up a mental picture. And there are no less than 99 different attributes given of Allah Subhana Wa Taala, in the Holy Qu’ran - No less than 99 different attributes of Allah Subhana Wa Taala are given in the Holy Qur’an. For example ‘Ar-Rahmaan’, ‘Ar-Raheem’, ‘Al-Karrem’, - ‘Most Gracious’, ‘Most Merciful’, ‘Most Benevolent’. He is called as ‘Rabb’, as ‘Raziq’, as ‘Lord’, ‘Cherisher’, ‘Sustainer’, ‘Provider’ - No less than 99 different attributes are given in the Holy Qu’ran for Allah Subhana Wa Taala. And the same message is repeated besides Surah Isra, Ch. No. 17, Verse no. 110, it is also mentioned in Surah Taha, Ch.No. 20, V. No. 8, in Surah Araf, Ch. No. 7, Verse No. 180 as well as in Surah Hashr Ch.No. 59, V. No. 24, which says ‘To Allah belongs the most beautiful names’. But whatever attribute you give to ‘Allah Subhana Wa Taala’ - to ‘Almighty God’, it should be a Unique attribute - It should only refer to Him and to no one else. And if we reverse the order, it should yet point out to Allah Subhana Wa Taala. For example, I am 5 feet 11 inches tall, I wear spectacles, I live in Bombay. If someone says that ‘Dr. Zakir Naik, is 5 feet 11 inches tall’ - It’s a correct characteristic. But if we reverse it,… ‘Who is 5 feet 11 inches tall?’- you will find more than a 1000 people, who are 5 feet 11 inches tall .It doesn’t point specifically to me - Its not unique. If you say Dr. Zakir Naik wears spectacles, its correct, but its not unique. Because if you reverse it, ‘who wear spectacles’? - there will be more than a thousand people who wears spectacles’. If some one says ‘Dr. Zakir Naik lives in Bombay, - he is right, but its not unique. ‘Who lives in Bombay?’ - More than a million people live in Bombay. So the attribute that you give should be unique. For example, if some one says that ‘Dr. Zakir Naik is the father of Fariq Zakir Naik, who was born on the 10th of July 1994, in Jahangir nursing home, in Poona’ - that’s a unique attribute. Because if we reverse it, ‘Who is the father of Fariq Zakir Naik, born on the 10th of July 1994, in Jahangir nursing home in Poona, the answer in only one - Dr. Zakir Naik - No one else. It’s a unique attribute - It points out to only one but one person. Similarly, let me give you another example - ‘that Dr. Zakir Naik is the founder Chairman of IRF Educational Trust, which was established on the 6th of November 1992 in Dongri, Mumbai’. If we reverse it, ‘Who is the founder Chairman of IRF Educational Trust, which was established on 6th of November 1992 in Dongri, Mumbai’ - the answer in only one - Dr. Zakir Naik. Similarly, if you call ‘Allah Subhanawataala’ by any attribute, by any name - it should be Unique. You can’t say Allah Subhanawataala is the ‘Creator of a building’, because even many builders can build buildings. You can call Him ‘the Creator of the Universe’ ‘Khaliq’, ‘the Creator’. Who is the ‘Creator?’ - Only one - Who is the ‘Ultimate Creator of the Universe?’ - Only one - Allah Subhana Wa Taala. ‘Ar Rahmaan’ - ‘Who is the Most Gracious’ - the answer is Only One - Allah Subhana Wa Taala. ‘Ar-Raheem’ – ‘Who is the Most Merciful?’ - The answer is Only One - Allah Subhana Wa Taala - So it should be a Unique attribute. The example I gave of myself was Unique - but was nothing great. Being the founder Chairman of IRF educational trust is nothing great - Its unique, fine - Its nothing great. But Allah Subhana Wa Taala, besides the attribute being Unique, it is something ultimate. Being the father of Fariq Zakir Naik is not ultimate - Its Unique - Its not ultimate. But Allah Subhana Wa Taala’s attribute besides being Unique should be Ultimate. You cannot give attributes which are just common - which you and I can also do. Secondly, besides giving Unique attribute, it should not be combined with characteristics which do not belong to Allah Subhana Wa Taala. For example if some one says that ‘Dr. Zakir Naik is the father of Fariq Zakir Naik, who was born on the 10th of July 1994, Jahangir nursing home, in Poona, and is 4 feet tall’. The attribute is correct - I am the father of the person who he said - but I am not 4 feet tall - I am 5 feet 11 inches tall. So if someone says ‘Allah Subhana Wa Taala’ - ‘Almighty God’ is a Creator - but he has got a human form like you and me - one head, two eyes, one nose, one mouth, two hands – ‘the Creator’ attribute is correct, but the characteristic of a human form is wrong.So besides the attributes being Unique, it should not be mixed up with false attributes. And the third is that the attribute, - the various attributes that you give to Allah Subhana Wa Taala should point only to one Allah Subhana Wa Taala - not more than that - Because there is Only One (Arabic)...‘Say He is Allah, one and only’. So if someone says that Dr. Zakir Naik is the father of Fariq Zakir Naik, born on the 10th of July 1994 in Jahangir nursing home, Poona - And Abdullah Shaikh is the founder Chairman of IRF Educational Trust, which was established on 6th of November 1992, in Dongri, Mumbai - One attribute is correct of mine - But my attribute is given to another person, who is not me. Abdullah Shaikh and Dr. Zakir Naik aren’t the same. So you cannot say that ‘Khaliq’… ‘the Creator’ is one God, and ‘Ar-Raheem’… ‘the Merciful’ is another God. If someone says that ‘Rain God’ is different…‘Cloud God’ is different, and … ‘Sun God’ is different and – ‘Creator’ is different, and ‘Cherisher’ is different - Its totally wrong. The attributes are correct, but it should point out only to one person and no one else. People may ask me that ‘what is wrong in having more than one God?’ The Polytheists, they may say – ‘Dr. Zakir Naik, what is the harm in having many gods’. If we have many gods, there will be fighting between them, and each one will try to defeat the other, and try and establish his rule. So people may say… ‘see we can divide - One is ‘a god of rain’, one is ‘a god of Sun’, ‘one is a god who created’, ‘one is a god who is a ‘Cherisher’. If we divide in such way, and have multiple gods, that means one god is unable to do the things of the other god. He does not have knowledge of the other god. It means it’s a ‘deficient God’ - Its not an ‘Ultimate God’ - and we don’t have to believe in a ‘deficient god’. We want to believe in a God which is Ultimate - The Supreme! No wonder you find in the mythology, of certain religions - gods fighting among themselves. And one god killing the other god, and one god taking the help of the other god to defeat the third god - This is found in the mythology. The Holy Qu’ran gives the answer, in Surah Al-Ambiya, Chapter 21, Verse. No. 22, that - it says that … ‘if there were more gods besides Allah, there would surely be confusion’. And we know that there is no confusion in the universe - The universe is running harmonously. Its further mentioned in Surah Muminun, Chapter 23, Verse no. 91 that… ‘Allah Subhana Wa Taala’ does not have any sons, neither does He have any partners. If there were many Gods besides Allah, each God would have taken what they created, and would have a hoarded over the other. So surely there has to be only one true God. If you analyze, all the religions which speak about ‘Concept of God’ - all of them ultimately believe in ‘Monotheism’ - That is they believe in one God. Any religion which believes in the concept of God, - ultimately that religion believes only in one God - At a higher level. At the lower level there may be other Gods but at the higher level it finally believes in one God only. If you analyze the Scriptures of Almighty God - they spoke about the true concept of Almighty God. But later on - the Scriptures, they got manipulated - they got interpolated - they got corrupted. Why? - By people - for their own requirements - to fulfill their own material desires. And later on, you have a religion which has been changed from Monotheism to Polytheism, or Pantheism. The Holy Qu’ran says in Surah Baqrah, Chapter. No. 2, Verse. No. 79 (Arabic)… ‘Woe to those who write the book with their own hands’. (Arabic)… ‘Woe to those who write book with their own hands and then say this is from Allah to traffic with it for a miserable price. Woe to those for what their hands do write and woe to those for what they earn’. The Holy Qur’an says that people have changed the Scripture of Almighty God for their own material desire - Woe to such people and woe to what they earn. There are certain Religions like ‘Buddhism’, ‘Confusiusnisn’, we have ‘Taoism’, which do not comment on God. Neither do they confirm, nor deny the existence of Almighty God - Its called as an ‘Agnostic’ Religion. We have other religions like ‘Jainism’, which are Atheistic - They deny the existence of Almighty God. Regarding, how to prove to the Athiest, or the Agnostic, the existence of Allah Subhana Wa Taala, you can refer to my Video cassette, “Is the Qu’ran God’s word” part I and II. This talk was given about two years ago in the same auditorium. Two years ago, in the same auditorium -Birla Mathushree - Where I have proved here, to an Atheist, to an Agnostic, to a Muslim, Christian, Buddhist, Jain, whether he be a scientist - to all these people - with reason, logic and science, on the basis of the Holy Qu’ran, the existence of Allah Subhana Wa Taala. So all those who want to know, how to prove to an Atheist or an Agnostic the existence of Allah Subhana Wa Taala, you can refer to my Video cassette. I think it is available in the foyer outside - Its available for sale outside - Part I and Part II. In Islam, we believe in ‘Tawheed’. Tawheed does not merely mean Monotheism, or merely meaning ‘Believing in one God’ - It has much more to it. ‘Tawheed’ means ‘Unification’ - Asserting Oneness. And its derived from the Arabic verb ‘Vahadah’ - which means to Unite, ‘to unify’. ‘to consolidate’ and there are three categories in ‘Tawheed’. The first is ‘Tawheed-Ar-Rububiya’. Its derived from the verb – ‘Rabb’, which means Lord, Cherisher, Sustainer - It means maintaining the unity of Lordship. And the basic concept here is, that Allah Subhana Wa Taala is the Person, Who created all the things which exist. He is not dependant on anything or any person, but all things and persons are dependant on Him. He is Absolute, whereas all the other thing - they are relative, and they are temporary and they are conditional. The second category is ‘Tawheed-al-Asma-Was-Sifaat’, Which means maintaining the unity of Allah Subhana Wa Taala’s Names and Attributes’ - And there are basically five points in this category. The first is, ‘Allah should be referred to according to what Allah and His Messenger described Him’. Second is, ‘Allah should be referred to as He has referred to Himself’. No one can call Allah Subhana Wa Taala, as ‘Al-Ghadir’ – ‘the Angry One’. The Qu’ran says that He gets angry - but that’s a quality which you cannot say ‘The angry One’. Because Allah and His messenger didn’t give that Attribute to Allah Subhana Wa Taala. The third is – ‘You cannot give human qualities to Allah Subhana Wa Taala’. Like some Scripture says that God Almighty after creating the universe, He has rested - He was tired. Some scriptures say that he repented. See, repenting, getting tired, are acts which human beings require - Not Allah Subhana Wa Taala. And the criteria for this category is, from Surah Ashuara, Ch. 42, V. No. 11 which says… (Arabic)... That…‘there is nothing whatever like Him - There is nothing whatever like Him’. And the verse continues, ‘He is the Seer and Hearer of all things’. But this Seeing and Hearing cannot be compared with what we human beings see and hear - because for us to hear, we require sound waves - we require a ear apparatus. God Almighty does not require all these things - So Allah Subhana Wa Taala Sees and Hears in a different way, as compared to what we human beings see and hear. The fourth point : is that Allah Subhana Wa Taala’s attribute cannot be given to any of His creatures. Like you can’t call a human being – ‘Without a beginning and without an end’. A person who will not die - he’s eternal. You can’t give this attribute to any human being or any of the creation of Allah Subhana Wa Taala. And the last point is : ‘You cannot give the name of Allah Subhana Wa Taala to any of his creatures, without prefixing – ‘Abd’. Certain indefinite forms like ‘Rauf’, ‘Raheem’ can be given, but the definite form, ultimate, without prefixing ‘Abd’- You cannot give like, ‘Abdur – Rehmaan’, ‘Abdur Raheem’. ‘Abd’ means slave - Slave of Rehman, Ar-Rahmaan, Slave of Ar-Raheem, Abdullah, slave of Allah. Neither can you give this ‘Abd’ to anyone besides Allah Subhana Wa Taala. You cannot say ‘Abdur-Rasool’ – ‘the slave of the messenger’. You cannot say ‘Abdul-Nabi’ – ‘the slave of the Prophet’. The third category of Tawheed, is ‘Tawheed – Al – Ibada’. The ‘Ibada’ has been derived from the Arabic word ‘Abd’. which means slave, servant. ‘Ibada’ means to ‘worship’. But many people have the misconception that ‘worship’ merely means ‘offering prayers’. Hah… prayer is one of the high form of worship, but that’s not the only form of worship. As I said, “Ibada” is derived from ‘Abd’ meaning ‘slave’, ‘servitude’. So worship means any commandment you follow of Allah Subhana Wa Taala you are doing worship. Anything which you do not do what Allah has asked you not to do - that is ‘Ibada’. So ‘Ibada’ is not merely prayers - it has much more to it - Obeying the commandments of Allah Subhana Wa Taala is ‘Ibada’. Without following the third category of ‘Tawheed-al-Ibada’, which is maintaining the ‘Unity of Worship’ - following the first two categories only, is useless. Because the Holy Quran says that there were pagans… Arabs at the time of the Prophet, who believed in the first two categories - That is ‘Tawheed-al-Ruboobiyah’ and ‘Tawheed-al-Asma-was-Sifat’, But not in the third category. And they were referred as ‘Mushriks’ and ‘Kafirs’- idolators and rejecters of faith. The Holy Qu’ran says in Surah Yunus Chapter No. 10, Verse. no. 31, ‘Say who is He that sustains life to you in the sky and the earth, or Who is it that Hears and Sees all things? And Who is it that gives life to things that are dead and gives death to things which are alive? Who is it that regulates and controls the affairs? - Soon they will say, it is Allah. So why don’t you have piety towards Him? - Why don’t you worship Him? A similar message is given in Surah Zukhruff, Chapter 43, Verse. No. 87, ‘That when you ask them, who has created them, they will say, ‘Allah’ - But they are far deluded from the truth. So the pagan Arabs at the time of the Prophet - even they had a concept of One Supreme Almighty God, which they called as ‘Allah’. But along with it they even had about 360 idols, which they worshipped. So if you worship anyone besides Allah Subhana Wa Talla, then you are not following the third category of ‘Taweed-al-Ibada’. And whether the first, second, or third category of ‘Tawhhed’ is missed by anyone, or if there is any deficiency in fulfilling any point of any of the three categories, it is called as ‘Shirk’. ‘Shirk’ means ‘associating partners’ - It means ‘Sharing’ - and in Islamic terms it means, ‘Associating partners with Allah Subhana Wa Taala’. The biggest sin which is mentioned in the Holy Qu’ran in ‘Shirk’ - Associating partners with Allah Subhana Wa Taala. It does not only mean that you worship some other god - but ‘Shirk’ - that is not fulfilling any of the three categories of ‘Tawheed’, leads to ‘Shirk’. And the Holy Qu’ran says in Surah Nisa, Chapter No. 4, Verse. no. 48, that ‘Allah Subhana Wa Taala’ will never forgive - associating partners to Him. If He pleases, He may forgive anything else, but the sin of associating partners with Allah - He shall never forgive’. The same message is repeated in Surah Nisa, Chapter. No. 4, Verse no. 116, that ‘those who do the sin of joining gods with Allah… Allah Subhana Wa Taala will never forgive them. Anything else if He pleases He may forgive. But all those who join gods with Allah, they have strayed far away from the truth. Its mentioned in Surah Maidah Chapter 5, Verse No. 72, (Arabic)... That they are doing Kufr - those who say that ‘Allah is Christ the son of Mary’. (Arabic)...but said Christ…(Arabic)...Oh! Children of Israel…(Arabic)… Worship Allah…(Arabic)...Who is my Lord and your Lord. (Arabic)... Anyone who associates partners with Allah…(Arabic)... Allah will make Jannat haram for them…(Arabic)... and fire shall be his dwelling place, and he shall have no helper in the hereafter. The Holy Qu’ran Says that Jesus Christ, peace be upon him, said - (Arabic)... anyone who associates partners with Allah…(Arabic)... Allah will make Jannat Harram for him…(Arabic)... and fire shall be his dwelling place, and he shall have no helper in the hereafter’. When I started my talk, in the beginning of it - the Qari, he recited verses of Surah Al-Imran Chapter 3, Verse. 64, which says (Arabic)... ‘that come to common terms as between us and you’. Which is the first term - (Arabic)... ‘that we worship none but Allah’. It doesn’t say, ‘we believe in One and Only Allah’ - believing is not sufficient. It says (Arabic)... ‘that we worship none but Allah’. (Arabic)... ‘that we associate no partners with Him’. So only believing in ‘One God’ is not sufficient - You should even only worship Him - And no one else, and associate no partners with Him. The Holy Qu’ran says in Surah Anam, Chapter 6, Verse. No. 108, ‘Revile not ye those whom they worship besides Allah - best out of spite, they revile Allah Subhana Wa Taala in their ignorance’. The Holy Qu’ran says in Surah Luqman, Chapter 31, Verse. No. 27, that ‘If all the trees on the earth were made into pens, and the ocean into ink, and the ‘Seven oceans to back it up, yet the words of Allah Subahana Wa Taala will not be exhausted in writing - Because ‘He is All powerful’, ‘Full of wisdom’. I would like to end my talk by giving the quotation of the Holy Qu’ran, from Surah Al-Haj, Chapter 22, Verse. No. 73 which says. – ‘Ye men, there’s a parable set forth for you - Listen to it. Those whom you call upon, anyone besides Allah - they cannot even create a fly - They cannot even create a fly. If all of them got together and if the fly took away some thing from them, they cannot even relieve from it. Feeble are those who petition, feeble are those on whom they petition’. Wa aakiru Dawana Anil Hamulillahi Rabbil Aalameen. 

(Dr. Mohammed) To analyze ‘The concept of God in Major Religions’ adequately, for all present here today, in the limited time available, we would like the following rules to be followed, during the question and answer session. Questions asked should be on the topic ‘Concept of God in Major Religions’ only. Questions not relevant to the topic, including any general questions on religion, will not be allowed. Kindly state your questions briefly and to the point - Only one question at a time may be asked. For your second question, you would have to go at the back of the row again, and await your second chance, to ask your question. Three mikes have been provided for the questions from the audience in the auditorium – two in the front next to the stage on my right and left side, and one at the back in the ladies section. Please stand in the queue at one of the mike, if you wish to put a question to the speaker - And speak into the mike only when the mike handling assistants hand the mike to you. We will allow one question on each of the mikes, in clockwise rotation. Written questions on slip papers, which are available from our volunteers on the sides and in the center aisle, would be given secondary preference, after the questions on the mikes are answered by Dr. Zakir, and if time permits. Kindly state your name and profession before putting forward your question. May we have the first question from the ladies side please.

(Q). As Salaam Wa Alaikum - I am Saba Baqai from Delhi, and my question to Zakir uncle is - the Christian concept of the God is the ‘trinity’… the father, the son and the holy ghost. But these are one - does this mean that they believe in only one God?

(Dr. Zakir). The sister has asked the question, that the Christians believe in ‘trinity’ - the father the son and the holy ghost, and that they are one. Does it mean that they also believe in one God? Sister, if you analyze, the word ‘trinity’ - it occurs, no where in the Bible. If you search the full Bible, the word ‘trinity’ doesn’t exist anywhere in the Bible - Its not there in the Bible. But the word ‘trinity’ is there in the Holy Qu’ran - But the word ‘trinity’ in there in the Holy Qu’ran. The Holy Qu’ran says in Surah Nisa, Ch. 4, V. No. 171, it says…(Arabic)... ‘Don’t say trinity’. (Arabic)... ‘Desist, stop it, its better for you - For God in one God’. It is again repeated in Surah Maidah, Chapter No. 5, Verse No. 73, it says…(Arabic)... ‘They blaspheme, those who say that Allah is one of three, in a ‘trinity’- For there is no God, but Allah’. The word ‘trinity’ is not mentioned in the Bible but it is there in the Qu’ran - and Qu’ran says…(Arabic)...‘Don’t say trinity’. The closest verse that you can find in the Bible, which can be taken for ‘trinity’ is the first Epistle of John, Chapter, No. 5, Verse No. 7 which says…‘For there are three which bears record in heaven - the father, the word, and the holy Ghost - and these three are one’. This verse of the Bible, 1st Epistle of John, Chapter 5, Verse No. 7, is the closest resemblance to ‘trinity’ in the full Bible. But if you read the ‘Revised Standard Version’, which has been revised by 32 scholars of the highest eminence, backed by 50 different Christian co-operating denominations - they have removed this verse from the Bible as an interpolation, as a concoction, as a fabrication. It was not removed by Muslims or non-Christian scholars - but it was removed by 32 Christian scholars of the highest eminence backed by 50 different co-operative denominations as an interpolation, as a concoction, as a fabrication, because it was not there in the original manuscript. We Muslims - we should thank the galaxies of DDs, ‘the doctors of Divinity’, for getting the Bible one step closer to the Qu’ran - Closer to Islam. As the Qu’ran says…(Arabic)...‘Don’t say trinity’. In fact if you analyze, as I said in my talk, Jesus Christ, (peace be upon him), never spoke about ‘trinity’- that father, son and Holy Ghost - they were one. In fact he said in the Gospel of John, Chapter 14, Verse No. 28, ‘My father is greater than I’, Gospel of John, Chapter No. 10, Verse No. 29, ‘My father is greater than I’, Gospel of Mathew, Chapter No. 12, Verse No. 28, ‘I cast out devils with the spirit of God’. Gospel of Luke, Chapter No. 11, Verse No. 20 ‘With the finger of God, I cast out devil’, Gospel of John Chapter No. 5, Verse No. 30, ‘I can of my own self do nothing - As I hear I judge and my judgement is just - Because I seek not my will but the will of the Father who has sent me’- He never spoke about ‘trinity’. In fact when he was asked that, ‘which is the first of the commandments’ - he said - its mentioned in the Gospel of Mark, Chapter No. 12, Verse. No. 29…(Hebrew)… Which means, ‘Hear O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord’. But if you ask the Christian Church - in the Catechism, they tell you that the Father is a person, the Son is a person, and the Holy Ghost is a person - but they aren’t three persons, - they are one person’. Person, person, person, but not three persons - one person - What language is this? 1+1+1 is equal to 3, Its not equal to 1. 1 into 3 is 3…Not 1. So when we ask them that suppose, there are three triplets, identical triplets - If one of them commits murder, can you hang the other - they say… ‘No’. Then you ask them why? - Because each one has a different personality - If one of the triplets commit murder you cannot hang the other, because each one has a different personality. And when the Christian, when they think of the Father in heaven, they think like an old man like ‘Santa Clause’, sitting in the Heaven on one of the Planet with the earth as His foot stool. When they think about the son, that Jesus Christ, (peace be upon him), they think if a tall man who is fair, who has got blonde eyes like Jeffrey Hunter. You see in the movie ‘King of Kings’. He did the acting of Jesus Christ (peace be upon him) - Jeffery Hunter - they have a certain mental picture. When they talk about Holy Ghost, they think of a ‘dove’ as the Bible says… ‘which came upon Jesus Christ, peace be upon him when he was baptized’ - Or they think it like a ‘spirit’ that came at the feast of Pentecost which is mentioned in the Bible. But when you ask the Christian that when you speak about trinity, how many pictures do you have in your mind - the Christian will tell you… ‘One’. Believe me he is lying to you, because 1+1+1 is three, it is not one. Hope that answer the question.
Q. Assalaam wa Alaikum - My name is Mohammed Javed and my question is - why can God not take a human form?
(Dr. Zakir) The brother asked a question that why can God not take a human form. If God wants, he can take a human form - But the moment He takes a human form, he ceases to be God. Because God and man, they are two opposites - Man is mortal - God is immortal. You can’t have a mortal and immortal person at the same time. Man has a beginning - God has got no beginning - You can’t have a person who has a beginning and no beginning at the same time. Man has an end - God has no end - So you can’t have a person, having an end and no end at the same time - It doesn’t make sense. So you can’t have a God man - You can either have God or you can have man - You can’t have a God man. So if God takes human form, He ceases to be God… He becomes human being - Because man requires to eat - God does not require to eat. The Qu’ran says in Surah Anam, Chapter 6, Verse No. 14, that…‘He feedeth everyone, but doesn’t require to be fed’. The human beings, they require rest - They require sleep. The Qu’ran says in Ayatul Qursi, Chapter. No. 2, Verse No. 255 which was also recited by the Qari, Brother Ashraf Mohammedy. (Arabic)... ‘Allah, He is one and only, The Self Existing, the Eternal, no slumber can seize, nor does He require sleep - To Him belongs everything in the heaven and the earth’. Therefore God, when He takes the human form, He ceases to be God - You can’t have a god-man together. And if a God becomes human being and gives up His quality, and becomes man - why should we worship a human being? Because he has same powers as you and me - People will want to worship you and me also then. What is the use of worshipping a person who has same powers like you and me? And later on if someone tells me this same human being became God, its not possible. If human beings can become God, even you and I would become God tomorrow. Therefore if Allah wants He can become a human being, but He ceases to be a God - Therefore Allah will never want to become a human being. Allah can tell a lie if He wants - But He will never tell a lie - Because to lie is ungodly - The moment He lies, he ceases to be God. Allah can do injustice if He wants, but He will not - Because to do injustice is ungodly. As the Holy Qur’an says in Surah Nisa, Chapter 4, Verse No. 40, that… ‘Allah Subhana Wa Taala is never unjust in the least degree’. So if He does injustice, He ceases to be God. Allah Subhana Wa Taala, if He wants He can make a mistake - But he will not make a mistake, because to make mistake is ungodly. The Qur’an says in Surah Taha, Chapter No. 20 V.52… ‘That Allah does not make mistakes’ Allah does not err. So if He makes a mistake He ceases to be God. Allah can forget if He wants - But He will not forget, because forgetting is an ungodly act. The Qur’an says in Surah Taha, Chapter 20, V.52… ‘Allah doesn’t make a mistake, neither does he forget’ -The moment He forgets, He ceases to be God. Therefore the Holy Qur’an says…(Arabic)… ‘Verily Allah has power over all things’ - In several places in Surah Baqarah, Chapter 2, V.No.106, In Surah Baqarah, Chapter 2, V.No.109, Surah Baqarah, Chapter 2 V.No.284, Surah Al Imran, Chapter No. 3, V. 29, Surah Nahl, Chapter 16, V.77, Surah Fatir, Chapter 35, V. No.1. And Allah says…(Arabic)…‘For Verily, Allah has power over all things’ - But Allah only does Godly things, he doesn’t do ungodly things. Because Qur’an says in Surah Buruj, Chapter 85, V. No.16…‘Allah is the doer of all He intents’ - Whatever Allah intents He can do - But He only intents Godly things. This theory of God becoming a human form, is called as ‘Anthropomorphism’ - Almighty God taking a human form. And most of the major Religions, sometime or the other, they have in their Philosophy, that God has taken a human form - Some religion once, some several times. And they have a very beautiful logic for that - they say that God Almighty, He is so Pure, He is so Holy, He doesn’t know regarding the feelings of the human being - regarding the shortcomings, the difficulties the human being can have. He is so Holy and Pure - And Allah Subhana Wa Taala doesn’t know how does a human beings feel when he is hurt - How does he feel when he gets into trouble. So therefore, God Almighty came in the form of a human being in this world to set the rules for the human beings. On the face of it, very good logic - But I tell these people, that if I manufacture a tape recorder, do I have to become a tape recorder, to know what is good or what is bad for the tape recorder? No! I just write an instruction manual - that when you want to play the audio cassette, put in the cassette, press the play button - When you want to stop, press the stop button - When you want to fast forward, press the FF button - Don’t drop it from a height it will get spoilt - Don’t immerse it in water, it will get damaged. I write an instruction manual - I don’t have to became a tape recorder to know what is good or what is bad for the tape recorder. Similarly, when Almighty God is our Creator, He doesn’t have to become a human being to know what is good or what is bad for the human being. He sends an instruction manual and the last and the final instruction manual for the human being, is the holy Qur’an. The Holy Qur’an is the last and final instruction manual for the human beings - The do’s and don’ts for the human beings. And he need not come down in this world as a human being to give us the instructor manual - What does he do? He chooses a man, amongst men to deliver His message - whom we call as Messengers or Prophets with whom He communicates on a higher level, through the ‘Revelation’. It is so clear cut to any logical person, that God Almighty cannot take human form - Any fool can also understand. That’s the reason the Holy Qur’an says in Surah Baqarah, Chapter 2, Verse No.18….(Arabic)… ‘The deaf, the dumb, the blind - they will not come to the true path’. And the Bible gives the same message in the Gospel of Mathew, Chapter No.13, Verse No.13… ‘Seeing they are see not, hearing they hear not, neither do they understand. Rigveda also gives the same message in Book No. 10, Chapter No. 71, Verse No. 4…‘That though they see the word, they see it not, though they hear the word, they hear not’.

(Dr. Muhammed) Next question from the ladies side.

(Q) Assalamwaalaikum, If all the major Religions and Scriptures speak about one God, then does it imply that all these Religious Scriptures - that is Bible, Vedas, etc., are the word of God - and does it further imply that which ever religion you follow, be it Islam, or Hinduism, or Christianity, it is one and the same?

(Dr. Zakir) The sister has asked the question, that I have quoted so many various Scriptures and proved about the concept of Almighty God - that is Monotheism - does it simply that all these religious Scriptures I quoted - they are the Word of Almighty God - and does it imply that irrespective whether you follow, Christianity, Hinduism and Islam, it is one and the same? Sister, many people have the misconception that Islam came into existence, and the founder of the religion of Islam was Prophet Muhammed (peace be upon him), 1400 years ago. In fact Islam is there in existence since time immemorial - since man set foot on the earth. And the Holy Qur’an says in Surah Fatir, Chapter 35, Verse No.24…(Arabic)…‘There is not a nation or a tribe to whom We have not sent a warner’. The Holy Qur’an says in Surah Rad, Chapter No.13, Verse No.7…(Arabic)…. ‘And to every nation have We sent a guide’. By name only 25 are mentioned in the Holy Qur’an - But our Prophet Muhammed (Salallahu Alaihi Wasallam) - he said that there were more than 124 thousand messengers sent on the face of the earth. By name we know only 25, mentioned in the Holy Qur’an - Adam, Moses, Jesus, Solomon, Muhammed, (Peace be upon them all) - But there were more than one hundred and twenty four thousand messengers sent. Similarly by name we know only four Revelations of Allah Subhana Wa Taala, of Almighty God - the Torah, the Zabur, the Ingel and the Furqaan. The Torah is the ‘Wahee’, ‘the Revelation’ which was given to Moses (Peace be upon him), Zabur is the ‘Wahee’, ‘the Revelation’ which was given to David (peace be upon him), Ingel is the ‘Wahee’ ‘the Revelation’ which was given to Jesus (Peace be upon him), and Furqaan, that’s ‘the Holy Qur’an’ is the last and final revelation which was given to the last and final messenger, Prophet Muhammed (Peace be upon him). But if you analyze that all the other Scriptures, - whether are they the word of God or not - Bible, can I say it’s the word of God or not? We believe in the Ingel, the ‘Wahee’ which was given to Isa Alaysalam - This Bible that the Christians have today, is not the ‘Wahee’ which we believe in. This Bible does contain the word of God - It also contains the word of Prophet, and also words of historians, as well as pornography. It is totally not the word of God - No wonder the Christian scholars, they are keeping on revising the Bible. We believe in the original ‘Wahee’ given to Isa Alaysalam - But the present Bible is not the correct ‘Wahee’- It may contain part of the ‘Wahee’. How to check up, which part is true? - We have to check it with the ‘Furqaan’ - And the Furqaan is the Holy Qur’an. Simlilarly, if you analyze all the messengers that were sent before Prophet Muhammed (Peace be upon him) - all the revelations that came before Holy Qur’an… all of these revelations and these messengers were only sent for their people and their message was supposed to be followed only for a particular limited time period. As the Holy Qur’an Says in Surah Al-Imran, Chapter No.3, V.49, that… ‘Isa Alysalaam – He was sent only for the Bani Israel’. The message is repeated in Surah Saff, Chapter No.61, Verse No.6… ‘that Isa Alysalam, the son of Mary was sent only for the Bani Israel… the children of Israel’. The same message is given in Bible in the Gospel of Mathew, Chapter No.10, Verse No.5 to 6, that Jesus Christ (Peace be upon him) tells his disciples that ‘go ye not into the way of the Gentiles’ Who are the Gentiles? The Non-Jews, the Hindus, the Muslims. ‘Go ye not into the way of the Gentiles, but rather go to lost sheep of the house of Israel’ - that means he was only sent for the house of Israel. Jesus Christ (Peace be upon him) said - It’s mentioned in the Gospel of Mathew, Chapter No.15 Verse No.24 that ‘I have not been sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel’. So all the messengers, and all the revelations - by name only four revelations are given in the Holy Qur’an.

But there were several revelations of Allah Subhana Wa Taala, like ‘Sugfe Ibrahim’ and various other Revelations. But all the revelations that came before the Holy Qur’an, and all the messengers that came before Prophet Muhammed (Peace be upon him) - they were only sent for their people and for a particular time period. But our beloved Prophet Muhammed (Peace be upon him), the Holy Qur’an says in Surah Anbiya, Chapter 21, Verse No.107, it says… (Arabic)…. ‘That We have sent thee, not but as a mercy to the whole of humankind, as a mercy to all the worlds, as a mercy to all the creatures’. The Holy Qur’an says in Surah Saba, Chapter 34, Verse No.28 that …(Arabic)… That ‘We have sent thee not but as a universal messenger, giving glad tidings and warning them against sin - But most of the human kind yet do not know’. Similarly all the Religious scriptures that were sent by Allah Subhana Wa Taala, that came before the Qur’an, were only meant for that people, and for a particular time period. But the Holy Qur’an - it says in Surah Ibrahim, Chapter 14, Verse 52, as well as Surah Baqarah, Chapter 2 Verse 185, and Surah Al-Zumur, Chapter 39, Verse No.41, that it was sent for the whole of humanity. Regarding your question - that are these Scriptures - the Vedas, the Bible, the Zend Avesta, the Dasatir, the Upanishads - are they the word of Almighty God? What I can say – that we believe in ‘Injil’ as the word of God - But the present Bible is not the word of God. Regarding Veda, Upanishad, Geeta, Zend Avesta, Dasatir, I can say - may be they were the word of God - May be. I cannot say for sure, since the Qur’an does not say that Vedas is the word of God - I cannot say for sure. I can only say ‘may be’ they were word of God. But even if they were the word of God, all the Scriptures besides the Holy Qur’an, have been changed by human beings - they have been corrupted. As a famous critic of Islam, William Myore - He said 2 centuries before, that ‘the only Religious Scripture which has maintained its purity, is the Holy Qur’an for 12 centuries. William Myore, who is a very strong critic of Islam - he had - to agree that this Qur’an has maintained its original purity for 12 centuries - He said this 200 years before. So regarding the messengers, whether Ram…whether Ram whether Lakshman, all these, were they messengers of God or not? Jesus Christ (Peace be upon him) - he was - Because the Qur’an says. But the name of Ram and Buddha and Zorastras is not mentioned in the Qur’an - What I can say, ‘May be they were’ - I don’t know. But even if they were, they were only meant for that time, and they were only supposed to be followed by that particular people. The Scriptures that came before the Qur’an, they were only meant for a particular group of people, and they were only meant to be followed till that time. So even if they were words of God - Even if the previous messengers were messengers of God - you only have to follow the last and final messenger - that is Prophet Muhammed (Peace be upon him). Even if the other scriptures were the word of God, today you have to follow the last and final message of Allah Subhana Wa Taala, - that is the Holy Qur’an, and nothing else. Regarding - can you be a Christian, Hindu, Muslim, - is it the same? No sister it is not the same. Why – Because if you analyze the Holy Qur’an says in Surah Al Imran, Ch. 3 V. No. 52, that Jesus (Peace be upon him), he was a Muslim. Same thing, as the Bible says in Gospel of John, Ch. 5, V. No. 30…‘I seek not my will, but the will of my Father’. If you translate into Arabic, ‘Not my will…God’s will’… It is nothing but Islam – He was a Muslim. Abraham (Peace be upon him) - the Holy Qur’an says in Surah Al Imran, Ch.3, V. 67… ‘He was not a Jew or a Christian – He was a Muslim’. So today, if you have to choose any Religion – the Holy Qur’an says in Surah Al Imran, Ch. 3, V. 19…(Arabic)... ‘The only Religion acceptable in the sight of Allah (swt), is Islam’. Though the other religions speak about Monotheism – only Monotheism is not sufficient. You have to believe in Tawheed – You have to do ‘Ibada’ of Allah (swt). That is why the Holy Qur’an repeats the message in the Surah Al Imran Ch. 3, V.No.85, that… ‘If anyone desires any other religion besides Islam… submitting will to Allah (swt) – it will not be accepted of him. And in the Hereafter, he will be among the losers’. Hope that answers the question.

(Q) Assalamualaikum I am Adam Khan, I am a Mechanical Engineer by Profession. First, I congratulate you for the beautiful speech you had delivered. Now my question is, ‘Water’ is called by different names in different languages - Like in English as ‘Water’, the Hindi as ‘Pani’, in Tamil as ‘Tanni’ - Similarly if God is either called ‘Ram’ or ‘Jesus’ - it is not one and the same ?

(Dr. Zakir) The brother had posed a question that – ‘Water’ in different languages can be called as ‘Water’ in English, ‘Pani’ in Hindi, ‘Tanni’ in Tamil - Similiarly God is one - Can we not call him by ‘Ram’ or ‘Jesus’, etc. (Peace be upon him)? I mentioned in my talk, the Holy Qur’an says, in Surah Isra, Chapter No. 17, Verse No. 110... (Arabic)…‘Say call upon Him by ‘Allah’ or by ‘Rehmaan’ by whichever name you call upon him, to Him belongs the most beautiful names’ You can call Allah Subhana Wa Taala by any name, but it should be a beautiful name, and it should not conjure a mental picture - It should contain the qualities of Almighty God. And the same message in repeated in Surah Taha, Chapter No. 20, Verse No. 8, in Surah Araf, Chapter No. 7, Verse No.180, as well as in Surah Al Hashr Chapter 59, Verse No. 24 which says… ‘To Allah belongs the most beautiful names’. You can call him by any name, but it should not conjure up a mental picture. Regarding your question that ‘Water’ is called by different names in different languages - and I know about it – In English its called as ‘Water’ in Hindi as ‘Pani’, in Tamil as ‘Tanni’ in Arabic its called as ‘Mayae’, in Surah Al Ambiya, Chapter 21, Verse No.30, In Sanskrit its called as ‘Apah’, - in Bhagwat Gita, Chapter No. 7, Verse No. 4. In shudh Hindi it’s called as in ‘Jal’, In Gujrati as ‘Jal’ or ‘Pani’, in Marathi ‘Pani’, It’s called as in Kannad, its called as ‘Nir’, in Telugu as ‘Nirr’ and Malayalam is ‘Vellum’. Various languages you can call. I gave you only 10 examples - Qur’an gives 99 attributes to Allah Subhana Wa Taala. But there is no objection if you call ‘Water’ in any language, as long as it is water - in any language. But it should be water - it should not be something else. For example, if suppose someone comes and tells me that… ‘I have been advised by my friend that - every day in the morning, I should have one glass of ‘Pani’. I know ‘Pani’ means water So I understand what he saying. But then he continues… ‘But when I have that one glass of pani, I feel like vomiting’ I ask him why do you feel like vomiting? So he tells me… ‘because the water stinks - It is yellowish in colour. Later I realized that what he is talking is not ‘Paani’, it is ‘Urine’. So somebody told him that you have one glass of urine - But the name he gave was ‘Pani’. So you now call water by ‘pani’, ‘tani’, ‘maya’ ‘apa’, ‘pani’ no problem - but it should be ‘water’. You can call ‘water’ by any name - but anything else besides ‘water’, neither can you call it ‘water’, neither can you call it ‘pani’, neither can you call it ‘tanni’, neither can you call it ‘Mayae’. ‘Water’ as ‘water’ you can call - But ‘something else’ as ‘water’, you can’t call. People may think that what an ‘illogical example - even an ignorant person can make out the difference between Urine and water. Only a fool will not know the difference between urine and water. And I agree with him, that ‘even an ignorant person knows the difference between urine and water’. Similarly those people who know the concept of Almighty God, the correct concept - they say that ‘these people who worship false gods, they are not only ignorant, they are foolish. Can’t they differentiate between a true God and a false God? You give it any name, but if it’s a true God, you can give it the name of God. If its not a true God, you are giving false god, the name of God - Aren’t they foolish?.- They are foolish. For example, if you want to buy some gold – If there’s a person who comes and wants to sell his gold jewelry to you, and he says, ‘this is 24 Carat Sona’. You know that ‘Sona’ in Hindi, means ‘Gold’ - In Arabic, it is ‘Zahaba’- You know it very well. But even after knowing that ‘Sona’ in Hindi is for ‘Gold’, yet you will not just buy it like that - You will verify whether the ‘Sona’, what he is calling ‘24 Carat Sona’, - is it actually 24 Carat Gold or not? You will not just buy it off. What will you do? You will go to a goldsmith, and verify whether it is actually ‘24 Carat Sona’ or not. And after verifying with the ‘touchstone’ - you know I gave the example of ‘touchstone’ in my talk - he tells you ‘it is fake’. Though the Jewelry was glittering - But all that glitters is not gold. You will verify before buying the ‘Sona’, whether it is actually ‘Sona’ or not. Why? - Because you have to pay money for it. You Know - You do not want to loose - Because you know if you loose a thousand Rupees. …. or ten thousand Rupees. – It is precious. So why don’t you do the same, when anyone says ‘this is God? - You check it up with the touchstone. Which is the touchstone? - Surah Ikhlas, Chapter No. 112, Verse No. 1 to 4 which says… (Arabic)… ‘Say He is one and only’. (Arabic)…. Allah the Absolute and Eternal. (Arabic)… He begets not nor is He begotten.(Arabic…..) There is nothing like Him’. So anyone says ‘this is God’, you first check it up with the ‘touchstone’ whether actually He is God or not. If he fits in that definition, we have got no objection, accepting that person who they are calling as ‘Almighty God’. For example, suppose some lunatic - he says that ‘Muhammed (Peace be upon him) - he is Almighty God’. - A lunatic, if he says that. You know we Muslims we love our beloved Prophet Muhammed (Peace be upon him) - We love him - we will do anything for him - we obey him. Even the Non-Muslims - Michael H. Hart when he wrote a book on “Hundred most influential people in the world, - No. 1 he gave to the last and final messenger, Prophet Muhammed (Peace be upon him). Yet…. Yet- inspite of that, we use the touch stone - Surah Ikhlas. Though we respect him maximum, amongst all the human beings -yet, we check with the touchstone - ‘Surah Ikhlas’. (Arabic)… ‘Say He is Allah, one and only’. Is Muhammed - one and only? (May Peace be upon him). Allah has sent several messengers he is not the only messenger. We agree, he is the last and final - But Qur’an says, we have to believe in all the messengers - do not differentiate in the belief of the messengers. Second is …(Arabic)…. ‘Allah the Absolute the Eternal’. We know that our beloved Prophet Muhammed (Peace be upon him), he was a great human being - But he was not Absolute and Eternal. He toiled, he worked hard - His biography tells us that, he was even stoned many times - he prayed to Almighty God. he was not absolute the Eternal. Third test is (Arabic...) ‘He begets not, nor is He begotten’. We know that he was born in Mecca, he had a father and mother, by the name of Abdullah and Ameena - He had parents. He had children also - Fatima (may Allah be pleased with her), Ibrahim (may Allah may pleased with him) - he had. He was begotten and he also begetted. So he is not Allah Subhana Wa Taala for sure. Though we Muslims, we love our Prophet, we respect our Prophet, No Muslim in his true senses will ever say that Prophet Muhammed is Almighty God - Never! You know why? Because Allah Subhana Wa Taala has seen to it, that the Islamic creed, the ‘Shahadah’ says…. (Arabic)… ‘There is no God but Allah, and Prophet Muhammed is the messenger of Allah’. We say this 5 times a day, minimum - In the ‘Adhan’, In the ‘Iqamah’, before ‘Salah’, we always say ‘There is no God but Allah and Prophet Muhammed (Peace be upon him), is the messenger of Allah’ - He is the servant of Allah. To see to it - No one however much you may love, he may not equate him to Allah Subhana Wa Taala. So whoever you are saying is ‘Almighty God’, you use the touchstone - Whether it be Jesus, whether it be Ram, whether it be Krishna, whether it be Buddha, whether it be Mahavir - use the touchstone - I have given you the touchstone. On the day of the judgement, I can give ‘Shahadah’ to Allah Subhana Wa Taala that the thousands of people that were present here, I showed them how to use the touchstone. Now the God that you worship… the God that you worship - you apply this formula of ‘touchstone’ to that God. If it passes the touchstone, even I agree, He is Almighty God. If it does not pass, then you cannot call him God at all - Hope that answers the question.

(Q) My name is M.D.Marathi - I am a technologist. Before I start, I just like to explain, that I would like to take the audience from the sentimental plane to a more scientific and rational plane - I hope I have your permission, please. Today’s school books present the following information – ‘In the course of evolution - the animal – man, or Homo Erectus, evolved 2 billion years ago with the brain size of 1000 cc, against the size of 400 cc of the Apes. Evolution continued with the brain growing to 1400 cc, 200 thousand years ago, and these animals were known as homosapians. The present form of man was evolved about 35,000 years ago, and is known as 
HomoSepians...Sepians. And Propologist have estimated that man developed a speech center in his brain 50,000 years ago. Now the question is… ‘In this record of development, when did God originate? And for what purpose?’ No. 2… ‘the progress of science has made it possible’…
(Dr. Mohammed) Only one question sir

(Q contd…) This is in relation to that - if you cut it short or …
(Dr. Mohammed) No, No….

(Q contd…) The answer will not be long - Give me time for the question...please… Ya…Ya…Okay. The progress of science has made it possible to clone all animals, including man, to produce any number of animals having all desired characteristics. If God ever existed… how much of the power attributed to God is now left with Him?
(Dr. Zakir) Sorry?

(Q contd…) If God is ever existed… how much of the power attributed to God is now left with Him? 3rd one : God is described as ‘A Sea of Kindness and Mercy’ - Yet, all leaders of all religions, when faced with the prospect of death, rush a hospital like the one to next door - and never to a place of worship, where they preached all their life, - that man lives and dies by the wish of God - Is there any explanation for this phenomenon?

(Dr. Zakir) The brother has asked basically 3 questions - First he gave, according to him, ‘the theory of evolution of man’ and said… ‘where does God fit in? Secondly, after God has created all these things, how much of His power has been reduced? Thirdly, that when you get sick you run to the hospital, not to the Temple or Church or Masjid - 3 parts of the question. He said the answer will be short - the question was long … so imagine to give a detailed answer will take time. Brother, I will like to tell you that what you quoted about the Homosapiens, etc. - You are talking about ‘The Theory of Evolution’, brother - theory of Evolution. I am a medical doctor - I have not come across a single book in my life which says… ‘The Fact of Evolution’. It is ‘Theory of Evolution’. And even I know about the ‘Theory of Evolution’, and about the Darwin’s theory. Complete answer… refer to my video cassette, ‘Qur’an and Modern Science - Conflict or Conciliation?’ What Darwin said was only a theory. He wrote a letter to his friend Thomas Thompton in 1881 – ‘That I believe in this theory of natural selection because …I don’t have any proof…Only because it helps me in Natural Selection, it helps me in ‘Embryology, in classification in Rudimentary Organ. There is no book saying ‘the Fact of Evolution’ - All the books say ‘Theory of Evolution’. That’s why if we have to say to a friend that – ‘if you were present at Darwin’s time - Darwin’s theory would have been proved right. Trying to insinuate you look like an Ape. There were missing links - Darwin himself said ‘there were missing links’. You spoke about the ‘Homonoids’- You only spoke about one wave - I will tell you about all the four waves. The first wave was ‘Lucy’… Lucy. Lucy was first wave, which name three and a half million years. You talk about 2 million years. I am telling you what Scientists have said 3 million years ago. Lucy - It died of, by the Ices. The second came the ‘Homoerectus’… Homoerectus… about 500,000 years. After that came the ‘Neanderthal Man’ - The 3rd wave about 40,000 years ago. And the last was the ‘Cro-Magnon’. But brother, there is no link between all these stages – It is only a hypothesis. According to P.P. Grashe… according to P.P. Grashe, who held the Chair of Evolutionary Studies in Paris, in Shojorn University, in 1971 - he said, ‘it is letting our imagination run too wild - Just based on vestiges, to say who our ancestors were? I do know there are some people who speak about Darwin’s theory - I am a medical doctor, I know about that - but do you know that there are hundreds of Scientists who speak against it. A few scientists … few scientists speak in favour, - but there are more who speak against it. For the complete answer refer to my video cassette, ‘Qur’an and Modern Science’. There are few Scientists… because there is no ‘Fact of evolution’, they say… ‘Let us support a theory’. Qur’an doesn’t support any theory or hypothesis - Qur’an speaks about facts. So regarding your 2 million years - Allah Subhana Wa Taala – No beginning - when man came, no one knows the exact date - no one knows, …assumptions…assumptions…assumptions. But Qur’an says… ‘The first man was Adam (Alaysalam) and with it came Eve (may Allah be pleased with her)’. Man hasn’t reached that stage. There is not a single statement in the Holy Qur’an, which Science has proved wrong yet. Hypothesis go against the Qur’an - theories go against the Qur’an. There is not a single scientific fact, which is mentioned in the Holy Qur’an which goes against established science - It may go against theory. So brother, your thing is only supported by a few people - Not by the majority. Regarding 2nd part of the question, that… ‘If Allah has created all these things, how less His power has become?’. You can’t understand Him completely. As the Qur’an says in Surah Anam, Chapter No.6, Verse No.103… ‘He is beyond comprehension’. I can give you a simile - Not exactly same. An ocean - If you take a drop out of the ocean, how much does the level of the ocean go down? How much? How much? Yet…yet, inspite of this, the difference between Allah becoming less when He creates things, and the difference between the level of the ocean becoming less is infinite. The level of the ocean may become .000000 somewhere .00 somewhere it will end. But Allah Subhana Wa Taala not even, and not even a bit, become less. He is ‘All Powerful’ – That is Allah Subhana Wa Taala. If such a God who becomes less… you do not worship such God who become less. He goes on creating - He will, sometime lose His power. So this God, He is Eternal, Absolute. As I said in my talk, He is Absolute and Eternal. Everything depends on Him - He doesn’t depend on anything. Where did Allah come? Allah was before the Universe was created - Does He fit in? Where did He get created? - He is uncreated. You are asking me the question when did He came into existence - He is uncreated. Its like you asking me - that when I tell that my friend - he told me, ‘That my brother, Tom, he gave birth to a child - Is the child, girl or a boy? I being a doctor, know very well that a man cannot give birth to a child - So where does the question come - whether it’s a girl or a boy. So you are asking me when did Allah came into the picture? Allah is uncreated - because He is uncreated, the question doesn’t arise - When did He come? He is there - The question doesn’t arise. Regarding the third part of the question - that when people get sick, they run to the hospital – they do not run to the temple, they don’t run to the mosque, nor to the church. The brother, may not be knowing - all the people - I am a doctor, I know, that when the doctors give up - the thing we doctors say – we doctors say. …Arabic…. ‘It is He who cures’. That doesn’t mean, if a person gets sick - only go the Temple. Because the Qur’an says in Surah Nahl, Chapter No.16, Verse 43, as well as in Surah Furqaan Ch. 25, Verse. 59, ‘If you are in doubt, go to a person who knows - who is an expert.
If you get sick, besides praying to Allah Subhana Wa Taala, go to a person who is an expert in medicine - go to a doctor. Qur’an says that. But even after going to the doctor, have faith in Allah, because He is the person who cures you. He can cure you with a doctor or without a doctor. So Allah Subhana Wa Taala says. ‘We don’t believe in blind belief - No Muslim scholar will ever say, ‘if you are sick, don’t go to a doctor’. Go to a doctor, but finally the Person who cures is Allah Subhana Wa Taala. That is why all the doctors when all their brain, all their science, and all the medicines fail, they say… ‘it is only Allah who can save you’.

(Q) Assalaamu Alaikum brother. I am Dr. Qamar Aara and my question - is Christians explain the concept of ‘trinity’ as well as, ‘that God can take human form’ - by giving the example that water can be present in 3 states - as ‘solid’ like ice, ‘liquid’ as water, and ‘gas’ as vapour - Yet it is one and the same water. Similarly a person can also be a father, a brother, a business man at the same time - But yet he is one and the same person - So why not the father, the son and the holy sprit?

(Dr. Zakir) The sister has asked the question regarding ‘trinity’. The Christians have the concept of ‘trinity’, - father, son, holy ghost. Her previous question was - I had proved it from the Bible, that Jesus (peace be upon him) never believed in ‘trinity’. Now she gave an example – She has given a human logic, asking a question, that if water can be present in three states - as Solid, Liquid and Gas - as Ice, Water and Vapour - When water can be in 3 states, why can’t God be? Similarly, the Christian missionaries - they pose the question… ‘Even God Almighty can be present in three forms - the father, son, and holy ghost. But if you analyze, I do agree matter can be in three states - Solid, Liquid and Gas. But you should realize that if water is present in 3 states… solid, liquid, gas - as ice, water, and vapour, in all the three states - the constituents, the component of water is the same... H2O. Even if its ice, the constituent and component is H2O - Even when it is water it is H2O - Even when it is vapour it is H2O - Even when it is ice… even when it is gas or liquid, it is H2O - That’s very important. Now lets analyze the example they gave of ‘trinity’ - Father, son and holy ghost. In 3 forms if you say… for the sake of argument, I agree - but are the constituents of all these three things, - father, son, that is Jesus Christ (peace be upon him) and holy ghost, the same? We know very well that human beings have got flesh and bones - A spirit and God Almighty have got no flesh and bones. Human beings require to eat -God Almighty does not require to eat. And the same message Jesus Christ (peace be upon him) gave - Its mentioned in the Gospel of Luke Ch. No.24, V.No.39 to 43. That, ‘Behold my hands and feet - Its I myself. Handle me and see - that a spirit has got no flesh and bones as you see me have. And he gave his hands and feet - And they were overjoyed. To prove what? that he was not a spirit - he was not God Almighty. And the verse continues ‘Do you have meat to eat’ and the next verse says that he ate broiled fish and honey comb. To prove what? - that he was God? To prove that he was not God! Jesus Christ (peace be upon him) said, ‘A spirit has no flesh and bones, as I have proving that he was not a spirit - he was not Almighty God. Regarding the second example - sister gave the example, that a person can be a father, a brother and a businessman at the same time, - So why can’t God be father, son and holy ghost. It’s a very good example, and I do agree that one person can be a father, can be a brother, and can be a businessman at the same time. Many people out here also may be father, brother and businessman at the same time. But if suppose, the sister of that man tells a secret to the brother, but natural even the father and businessman will know that secret, because he is one and the same person. If a sister tells a secret to the brother, who is a father and a businessman at the same time - when the secret is told to the brother, even the ‘father’ part of that man, and ‘businessman’ part of the man will know the secret. But when you read in the Bible, in the Gospel of Mark, Ch. No. 13, Verse No. 32, it says ‘Of that day, of that hour, knoweth no man, - no, not even the angels in the heaven, nor the son of man, but the father’. ‘The knowledge of the hour of that day - no one knows. Jesus Christ (peace be upon him) said ‘Except the Father’ - not even the angels, not even himself. If Father -, the God Almighty, and Jesus Christ (peace be upon him), were one and the same - then if knowledge of hour is known to God Almighty, even Jesus should know about it (peace be upon him). So this proves that they were not one. Further… further, if the brother dies, even the man and the businessman will die… If the brother dies, even man and businessman will die. So when Jesus Christ (peace be upon him), according to the Bible… according to the Christians, he died on the Cross - do you mean to say even God Almighty and the Holy ghost died?

(Q) Assalmu alaikum, I am Riaz Wadgaonkar… and a businessman. Sir, my question is - Allah is the most appropriate name for God - So besides Qur’an is it mentioned in any other religions scriptures?
(Dr. Zakir) – The brother posed the question that ‘Allah Subhana Wa Taala’,as explained in my talk… is an appropriate name for ‘Allah Subhana Wa Taala’ – ‘Almighty God’.

Is this name ‘Allah’ mentioned anywhere else in the other Religious Scripture? If you analyze, most of the Religious Scriptures which have concept of Almighty God - somewhere or the other, most probably, one of the attributes of God Almighty is ‘Allah Subhana Wa Taala’. For example, if you read the Bible - in the Hebrew language, they call ‘God Almighty’ as ‘Elohim’. ‘Him’ is a sign of respect in the Semitic languages. So actually it is ‘Elo’. ‘Elo’ for God. And if you read the Bible Old Testament also, it says, for God, ‘Elo’, or ‘Ela’. And in the English Bible, revised by Reverend Scofield - he gives the spelling of ‘Ela’ as alternatively, either as ‘El’ or ‘Elah’ or ‘Alah’. It is pronounced as ‘Elah’, ‘El’, ‘Elah’ or ‘Alah’. We Muslims when we write in English ‘Allah’, - we write ‘Allah’ But Reverend Scofield wrote ‘Alah’. They pronounce ‘Elah’, we pronounce ‘Allah’. When I was in school, I was taught T-O to, D-O… do, G-O… GO, is what? Not goo… it is go. I was taught B-U-T… but, C-U-T… Cut, N-U-T… Nut, P-U-T… not Put…But. I said…‘What sort of a language is this?’ They said…‘No, you have to say B-U-T… but… not boot’. And if I have to pass the examination, even I say ‘BUT’ – ‘but’. Go - is not goo - it is go. I have to, because its their language. Similarly we know how to pronounce correctly – ‘Allah’. They say ‘Alah’- we say no problem. The right pronunciation is ‘Allah’. Later on when Reverend Scofield realized what he had done - that he is coming closer to the Qur’an - may be people took objection - In the Revised Edition that thing is taken out – ‘Alah’ is taken out. So now when you get those copies… English Bible - only ‘El’ and ‘Elah’ is there – ‘Alah’ is not there. But inspite of that, yet Alhamdulillah, by the Grace of Allah Subhana Wa Taala in every Bible, yet the name of ‘Allah’ is there. Because according to the Bible, when Jesus Christ (peace be upon him) allegedly he was crucified - its mentioned in the Gospel of Mathew, Ch. No. 27, Verse No. 46, as well as the Gospel of Mark, Ch. No. 15, V.No.34 - when he was put on the cross, he cried out ‘Elai Elai Lama Sabac thani’- so as to say ‘Oh God, Oh God, why have thou forsaken me. ‘If you analyze and ask them that - what is, ‘Elai, Elai Lama Sabacthani’. It is a Hebrew quotation, but it has been maintained - even in the English Bible. It has been maintained. And then they translate… ‘Elai Elai Lama Sabacthani’… ‘Oh God, Oh God, why have thou forsaken me?’. Some people say… ‘the name of God is ‘Jehovah’. So I ask them, ‘does ‘Elai Elai Lama Sabach thani’ - sound like ‘Jehovah ‘Jehovah’ why has thou forsaken me? They say… ‘No’. Does it sound like ‘Jesus… Jesus (peace be upon him), why has thou forsaken me?’. They say… ‘No’. Hebrew and Arabic language are sister languages. If you translate… ‘Elai Elai Lama Sabactani’ into Arabic… it is ‘Allah Allah Lama Sabachtani’. Does it sound similar? - Yes! Why? – Sister languages. And the best part of it is that, the Bible has been translated into more than 2000 different languages - and in every language, this quotation is verbatim… the same… ‘Elai Elai Lama Sabachtani’ Whether it is a Tamil Bible, Chinese Bible, Hebrew Bible, any Bible - this Hebrew quotation has been maintained, and the word ‘Allah’ (Subhana Wa Taala) is there, in each and every translation of the Bible. This word ‘Allah’, - the Guru Nanak, one of the attributes he gave to God, is ‘Rahim’- Also he gave ‘Allah’. If you read the Hindu Scripture Upanishad - one of the Upanishad is called as the ‘Allo Upanishad’, and God Almighty is called by ‘Allah’ several times. Even in Rigved…even if you read the Rigved, the name of ‘Allah’ (Subhana Wa Taala) - one of the attributes is given in Book No. 2, Hymn No.1, Verse No. 11 - the name - one of the attributes of God Almighty as, ‘Allah’. They write it as ‘Ila’. But when you pronounce it, we have to tell them - Pronounce it as Allah. Hope that answer your question.

(Q) Assalaam Alaikum – My name is Haji Muhammed. Brother Zakir… Brother Zakir, you mentioned in your talk that Jesus never claimed Divinity. But it is mentioned in the Bible that Jesus said… ‘I and my father are one’ Does this not simply that he claimed Divinity?
(Dr. Zakir) Brother has asked a question that I said in my talk, that nowhere does the Bible say ‘that Jesus Christ (peace be upon him) claimed Divinity’ - And he gave a quotation of the Bible, that Jesus said ‘I and my father one’. What the brother is quoting is, a verse from the Bible, in the Gospel of John, Ch. No.10, Verse No.30, which does say… ‘I and my father are one’. But when you ask the Christian missionaries, that… ‘What is the context?’ I have not yet met a Christian missionary, who can tell you the context without opening the Bible. He knows ‘I and my father are one’, but he does not know the context. For example, if I quote to someone, that the Qur’an says, ‘Does not pray’ - Most of the Muslims would be shocked - what am I saying? And if you open it up, it says… ‘Do not pray’ - but its half the verse. Surah Nisa Ch.4, Verse No.43, says ‘Do not pray with your mind befogged’ - Do not pray when you are intoxicated. So if I only quote… Do not pray - It will mean Qur’an says, ‘Don’t pray’ – half the quotation. So for the context, ‘I and my father are one’ - you have to go to the Gospel of John, Ch. No.10, Verse No. 23, and I am quoting from my memory, that ‘Jesus walked into the temple, in Solomon’s porch’. Verse No. 24 says, and the Jews came around him and asked him. ‘How long does thou make us doubt? - If thou art the Christ, tell us plainly’. Verse No.25 says, ‘I told you, but you believe me not - the works that I do in my father’s name, - they bear witness of me. Verse No.26 says that, ‘you believe not because you are not my sheep, as I said unto you’. The Jews, they are asking Jesus Christ (peace be upon him) that ‘Why don’t you speak plainly?’. So he tells them that…‘Yes I am the Messiah - I have told you clearly, but because you are not my sheep, you don’t believe in me. Verse No.27 continues…Jesus Christ (peace be upon him) continues saying that… ‘My sheep - they hear my voice, and I know them - and they follow me. Verse No.28, that… ‘I give them eternal life - no man can pluck them out of my hand, and they shall not perish’. Verse No.29 says ‘My father who giveth to me, He is greater than all - No man can pluck them out of my father’s hand. Then Verse No. 30 says, ‘I and my father are one’ – ‘Any person who has little bit sense can make out, ‘I and my father are one’ doesn’t mean one - as one person. It means one is purpose. Verse No.28 says, ‘No man can pluck them out of my hand – Jesus Christ (peace be upon him) says- ‘No man can pluck them out of my hand’. Verse No.29 is saying. ‘No man can pluck them out of my father’s hand’. Verse No.30 says ‘I and my father are one’ -In purpose. Both Jesus Christ (peace be upon him) and Almighty God - they are one in purpose. If I say that my father is a doctor… and he is a doctor… Alhamdulillah - Even I am a medical doctor. If I say, ‘I and my father are one’ - What does it mean? It means one in purpose - As medical profession, my father is a doctor - Even I am a doctor. It doesn’t mean that ‘I and my father are one’. It means my father is a medical doctor - even I am a medical doctor. But Christians say ‘No.. No – it means ‘one’ - actual Unity. So we say… ‘Okay, you say actual unity… let us read further’. If you go ahead in the Gospel of John, Ch. No.17, Verse No.21, it says that, Jesus Christ (peace be upon him) said that… ‘Ye all of them are one - My father in me, and I in thee, we all are one’. ‘Does it mean that God Almighty, is in Jesus Christ… and Jesus Christ is in all his 12 disciples. So there will be 14 gods - Jesus Christ, God Almighty, and 12 disciples. The same ‘one’ is used there, and here. If you go to the source, the same word is used - If you go to the Greek… the same word is used - So does it mean you have 14 gods? And among those disiples, Judas was a traitor -. Even he is God? Thomas doubted Jesus Christ (peace be upon him ) - is he God? - ‘Peter’ - Jesus Christ says … ‘is satanic?’- Is he also God? No, - all of them, God Almighty - Jesus Christ and the Apostles, are one in purpose - they are same. Again if you go 2 verses ahead - Gospel of John, Ch. 17, Verse 23, says that, ‘I am in thee, and you are in me’… he tells the disciples. Does it make all them God? No! It means one in purpose. But then Christians will say, ‘I have quoted the first part... why don’t you quote after that... after Verse No.30 - Gospel of John Chapter 10. Lets go ahead - Gospel of John, Ch. No. 10, Verse No.31. says, ‘And Jews picked up stones again, to stone at Jesus (peace be upon him) Verse No. 32, says… ‘And Jesus (peace be upon him) asked them - for which of the good works of my father, do you stone me?’ Verse No. 33, says that…‘We don’t’ stone you for any good works, but because you blashpheme – being a man, you call yourself God – that is why we stone you’. Verbatim…I am reading from my memory - Any person who wants to check up, can check up. It is there in the Bible - Gospel of John, Ch. 10, Verse 23 onwards… I am quoting. So Jesus Christ (peace be upon him) gives the answer - the Jews say that see he is trying to blaspheme, calling himself ‘God’. Good riddance - they want to kill him - good riddance. The Christians say ooh! the Jews called him God Almighty - See they understood him correctly - for redemption. One wants for redemption - they are calling him God - the other group of people for good riddance. But the answer is given in the next verse - Verse no. 34, of John Ch. 10, Gospel of John, Ch. 10, says that…‘Is it not mentioned in your Scriptures that ye are gods? - and if the person to whom the word’ of God came … if he says… ‘god’ - the Scripture is not broken. If you check up in the Bible, in the Psalms, Ch. No. 82, Verse No.6, does say that, ‘Ye are gods’. So Jesus Christ gave the answer, that the person to whom the ‘Word’ of God came, if you call him ‘God’, it is not blaspheme. It is meaning that… they are one in purpose. Hope that answers the question. 

Assalam Alaikum, - this is Yaseen Ahmed - I am a Software Engineer by profession. My question is - the Hindu Pandits and Scholars, agree that the Vedas, and other Hindu Religious Scriptures prohibit idol worship, but initially because the mind may not be matured, therefore an idol is required for concentration while worshipping. After the mind reaches higher consciousness, the idol is not required for concentration. What do you have to say about it? The brother has asked the question, that the Hindu Pandits and Scholars - they agree that the Vedas is against idol worship, against making an image of Almighty God - but they give the logic that initially, because the mind is not matured, you require ‘idol’ to concentrate. Later on, when you reach higher consciousness, ‘idol’ is not required. If this is the logic, then I would like to say that we Muslims have already reached the higher consciousness. We don’t require…We don’t require any ‘idols’ to concentrate on Almighty God - We have already reached the higher consciousness - If this is the logic. But now let us analyze. Once I was having a discussion with a Swami, from the ISKCON, ‘Hare Rama Hare Krishna’ - you know its there in Bombay – ‘Hare Rama Hare Krishna’. He came to IRF, and we were having a discussion on idol worship. So he gave me the example that brother Zakir, see when your son asks you, ‘why does it thunder? ‘So you tell him that ‘Aayee maa chacki Peesti hai’. ‘Aayee maa chacki Peesti hai’ – ‘that is the Grand mother in heaven, she is grinding flour. Why? Because the child is innocent - He can’t understand - Therefore we give this. Similarly, human beings… because they are immature initially, - idol is allowed - Later on when they get matured, idol is not allowed. So I tell them… and I told this, Swami from ISKCON, ‘Hare Rama Hara Krishna’, that I will never tell my child, when he asks me, ‘why does it thunder?… that ‘Aayee maa chakki peesti hai’ ‘Grandmother is grinding flour’. You know why, - because to tell a lie, is ‘Haraam’ - Its wrong to tell a lie, in Islam. You cannot tell…even if it’s a white lie - you can’t say. In extreme cases, certain cases… when someone puts a gun, and you lie – that’s a different thing - Otherwise normal circumstances, why should a person lie? Because, if I tell my son, ‘that Aayee Ma chakki peesti hain’ ‘Grandmother is grinding flour in heaven’ - when he goes to school, and when the teacher teaches him that the thundering after lightning, is due to expansion of rapidly heated air - he will think, the teacher is lying And afterwards when he comes to know the fact he will say ‘my father was a liar’. ‘Ayee Maa Chakki nahin peesti hai’. So this is the problem. Then why should we say such wrong things? And this philosophy is there, common amongst all human beings - Common most of them, if not all. And you know, we have… like people who stay in a building… like, when they play with their children - you know they throw the toy out – ‘Kawwa lekey gaya’ – ‘Crow has taken it’. - You know. You do the action of throwing the toy out of the building –‘Kawwa lekey gaya’. Then you find even your child is throwing out toys. And then when you ask these parents…‘Why are your children throwing out toys? ‘Woo toh… everyone does - Sab log karte - Sab children phektain hai. The mother will tell… ‘all the children throw out toys - So if my child throws… what is great?’ All the children don’t throw - It is because most of the parents do this trick.- Kawa leke gaye. So even he wants to do that trick - Even he throws it out. My son, Alhamdullillah we are staying in 9th storey,…9th storey in Mazgaon. My son has never thrown out any toys. You know why? I have never played that trick with him – ‘Kawwa leke gaya’. So you teach wrong things and your child remains following wrong things. Best is to give the answer – Simplify…Simplify and give the answer, to the best of the their understanding. I know the child… many things, he doesn’t understand - Give the answer in a simple way. But if you don’t know the answer, you should have the guts to tell the truth… ‘I don’t know’. But most of the children specially nowadays, they won’t take the simple answer. If I tell my son ‘I don’t know’ - he will tell me… ‘Abba, why don’t you know?’ So what happens, then we have to do our homework - We have to go and find the answer - It educates us, as well as our children. But never tell a lie -You can never let your child grow up on falsehood. There are other Pandits, when I have discussions, they give me the example that, ‘See brother Zakir, we don’t know that Vedas are against idol worship, and its wrong to do idol worship. But initially, in standard one, because the mind is not matured, idol worship is fine - But when they graduate, then idol worship is not required. So I tell them that if a person goes to school in standard one, the fundamental, the basics, of any subject should be strong. If the basics and fundamentals are strong… in future - even the structure will be strong. If the basics are not strong, the structure may not be strong. So if a teacher teaches in Standard One… in Mathematics, 2 + 2 = 4. Even after he goes to standard 3,4,5 and he passes school, when he becomes a graduate, even if he does Ph.d in mathematics, yet 2 + 2 will always remain 4. He may learn Trigonometry, Algebra, Logarithms…but the basics of Arithmatics addition 2 + 2, will remain the same. If the teacher teaches wrong things, 2 + 2 is 5, or 2 + 2 is equal to 6, in Standard 1 - what will happen to the student when he graduates?. Therefore the basics should always be strong - the fundamentals should always be strong. And these Scholars, they know very well, the fundamentals of the Vedas are regarding concept of God – ‘that God has no image’. You cannot make any idol of God – that is the fundamental. I ask these people, that if you know that the followers of your Religion are doing wrong things, it is your duty to correct them. If your son says 2+2=5, will you keep quiet…In standard one? You will say – ‘NO’ ‘NO’, let him graduate, and then I will tell him that 2+2 = 4 -Will you say that? You will correct him initially - you won’t wait till he graduates. As much as you can explain, you explain. So if you know that the Vedas, are against idol worship, it is their job to tell the people, that this is the fundamental of faith. Even in the initial stages, you can worship Allah Subhana Wa Taala, without any idol. Hope that answers the question.

(Dr. Mohammed) Now we would allow one question on the slip, and one on the mike, in continuing in the clockwise rotation, so that we give an opportunity for the people, who have taken the trouble to write the question on the slip, One question on the slip - then on the mike again on the slip, then on the mike, again on the slip, then on the mike.
(SLIP) The question is, when all believe in one God, why people fight in the name of God, and in the name of Religion?

(Dr. Zakir) The person asked the question- that if all the people, all the human beings, or most of them believe in one God… believe in one type of religion - why do they fight? - Why are there so much of in fighting, riots, etc. No religion, which I know of, tells that people should fight with each other unnecessarily - No religion says that. Neither the Qur’an, neither the Veda, neither the Bible - Unnecessarily you should not. And the Holy Qur’an says, in Surah Maidah, Ch.No. 5, Verse No. 32, if any one kills any human being, unless it be for murder or creating mischief in the land, it is as though you have killed the whole of humanity’. Qur’an doesn’t say, ‘if you kill a Muslim you have killed the whole of humanity - If you kill any human being, unless it be for murder, or creating mischief in the land, it is as though you have killed the whole of humanity. So no religion teaches, that people should fight with each other unnecessarily. Suppose people are trying to oppress you, then most of the Religions say that you should put that oppressor back in its place. Qur’an says that in Surah Anfal, Surah Tawba, that if the people try to drive you out of your house, out of your faith, out of your land, then… you can fight them for self defense. Even the Geeta…the whole Bhagwad Geeta - it is known as the ‘Nectar’ of the Vedas – Lord Krishna, he is giving advice to Arjun that… ‘See you fight for the truth - Even if the opposite people are relatives, don’t stop… If they are in the wrong - you fight. The Qur’an says in Surah Isra, Ch. 17, Verse 81….(Arabic)….. ‘That when truth is hurled against falsehood, falsehood perishes, for falsehood in by its nature bound to perish’. The Qur’an is a ‘Healing’ and ‘Mercy’ for those who believe - It was revealed in stages. But for those who are unbelievers it is nothing but loss after loss. So basically no Religion tells you to fight, unless in self defense. Even the police kills the robber, in self defense - Kills the criminals. But yet I do know that people fight. Why?… Is the big question - You know what’s the reason? Why?… Is the big question - You know what’s the reason? The reason is, people fight for power, for material things. The politician - he wants ‘vote’. So what does he do? He instigates a riot…a riot and then you get marginalized - And then Hindus vote Hindus, and Muslim vote Muslims -Politicians. If a builder wants a land - You can’t acquire the land because there are 1000 huts there. What does he do? He instigates a riot on the base of religion - the huts are burned down and then he builds a big building on that land, for money. So these people, for power, for money, for material requirements - these people, they instigate the riots. Otherwise, the common Hindus, the common Muslims – Alhamdullillah, we love each other - We love our Non Muslim brothers. Bombay… you know Bombay, even during partition, there was not such a riot as we had a couple of years ago. Were engineered by whom? Politicians! Politicians engineered it - All because, for power, for material desires. Otherwise, no religion says that you should fight with one another. We do know - we have similarities - We agree with that - We have differences also. But a politician, on front of everyone, he will say, ‘Ram bhi Khuda, … Allah be Khuda’ - Front of you – And behind he goes and engineers riots. See we don't believe in Pseudo secularism. If suppose two people are there - one person is saying 2+2 = 4, the other person is saying 2+2=5. That does not mean Oh! He is such a good man, 2+2 is also equal to 4, 4, 2 + 2 is also equal to 5. I am very desh bakth… secular person. What secular? Hypocrisy! I should have the guts to say-‘see what you are saying 2 + 2 = 4 is right - what you are saying 2+2=5, is wrong… but I will not fight with you. I will tell you the truth, I will not fight with you. Then the Qur’an says in Surah Kafirun, Ch. 109, Verse No. 1 to 6. …(Arabic)…. ‘Say to those who reject faith - I will not worship what you worship, nor will you worship what I worship. I will not be worshipping that which you want me to worship, nor will you worship what I worship. To you is your way, to me is mine’?- To you is your religion, to me is mine.

I will present the truth to him… ‘Bhai, don’t do idol worship... Don’t have wrong concept of God’. Yet if you have…. (Arabic)… ‘To you is your way, to me is mine’ The Holy Qur’an says in Surah Baqarah, Ch.2, Verse No. 256…(Arabic)...‘There is no compulsion in religion - Truth stands out clear from error. If you hold the hand of Allah Subhana Wa Taala, He will take you from darkness to light. If you hold the hand of the evil one… the devil, he will take you from light to darkness. The choice is yours. But no Religion says that you should fight with each other, unnecessarily. Hope that answers the question.

(Q) My name is Sushil Karamgutkar - Official photographer, All India Radio Vivid Bharti Service and Bombay Doordarshan Kendra. I have visited Holy country of Islam that is Saudi Arabia 3 times and spent nearly four years in Saudi Arabia, and watched Islam from closer distance. Now Dr. Zakir Naik, my question is… there is a Muslim blind person his one eye is replaced by eye donated by a Hindu person, his kidney… one kidney is replaced by a kidney donated by a Christian person, and his heart is replaced, by a heart donated by a Parsi gentlemen. Such a Muslim person, will be allowed to perform prayers in the mosque?
(Dr. Zakir)

The brother has asked a question, that he has been to Saudi Arabia - and one person his eye is from a Hindu, a heart from a Christian, and kidney from so and so various things. So having eye from another Religion, heart from other Religion, - can you offer Salaah in the Mosque? The answer is brother according to Islam Every human being is born as a Muslim. Every heart is a Muslim, every kidney is a Muslim, every eye is a Muslim. What is the meaning of Muslim? Muslim is a person who submits his will to Allah Subhana Wa Taala. Every heart, submits its will to Allah Subhana Wa Taala - I am talking about the organic heart… Organic heart. Organic heart… it pumps blood… the heart of the Christian pumps blood. the heart of a Muslim pumps blood. The heart of a Hindu pumps blood. The heart is a Muslim - talking about the organic heart. Eye…the organic eye is a Muslim. But you see wrong things… I am sorry… I am not telling you. ‘You’… means - the human being see wrong things. So human being is to be blamed - But the eyes ‘see’. The eye is following the will of Allah Subuhana Wa Taala. The kidney is doing its job - Its purifying. It’s a Muslim. So whether a heart taken from a person who is born in a Hindu family, or Christian family - every heart is a Muslim, every eye is a Muslim, every kidney is a Muslim. He will be very well allowed to pray in a Mosque. But even if a Non-Muslim wants to come to the Mosque, he is most welcome. Our beloved Prophet - he had discussions about ‘Concept of God’. Time didn’t permit me, - the Revelation of Surah Ikhlaas, ‘the Touch stone’, …The Touch stone of Theology, which I gave to every one, was revealed… When?. When he was having a discussion with the Christians in a Mosque… and they asked him ‘Who is Allah?’ Now what can you think?. The Qur’an says ‘You convert all the trees into pens, all the ocean into ink’. What will he say? – Rahman… Rahim - what answer can He give? The direct revelation came… ‘Qul’ – ‘Tell them’. ….(Arabic)… ‘Say.. He is Allah the One and Only. (Arabic)… Allah the Absolute the Eternal. (Arabic)… He begets not nor is He begotten
(Q) Next question from the slip is from Swati. S. Malik - She is an Engineer.

As you mentioned in your talk, that Hindus say Sun, Moon, Snake and Monkey is, God. Basically its not like that - we Hindus don’t believe that the above mentioned things are God - But we believe that god is everywhere. God is in each and every thing, God is in goat, God is in air, in fire. Does Islam believe the same? If not, then why? What’s wrong in this?
The question posed was that they believe that the Moon the, Sun, the trees they are’nt God… but God is present everywhere. Since God is present everywhere,…therefore we worship it. What does Islam believe? The Holy Qur’an says that ‘wherever you turn yours face, you will find Allah Subuhana Wa Taala - Allah is everywhere. But what does it mean? Are you talking – ‘Allah is present physically?’ 1st question is- ‘Is Allah physical?’ When Qur’an says Allah is everywhere - Do you mean to say physical? My question is… ‘What do you mean Allah is everywhere? Is it physical?’.If physical – If you believe Allah is physical, then you should be able to see Him. No eye can see Allah Subuhana Wa Taala - Its not physical. The knowledge of Allah is everywhere…the knowledge of Allah is everywhere - Allah has power over all things - But physically, He is not everywhere. First of all - is God physical?. So therefore the Qur’an gives the logic in Surah Shura, Ch. 42, Verse No.11, (Arabic)…. There is nothing unto Him - Nothing like whatever unto Him. So if you give physical natures to God that’s the reason you worship the ‘idol’. So I am telling you - the moment you worship the Sun, do you mean to say ‘God is only there, and nowhere else?’ So even if I agree with you – ‘OK, you say God is everywhere - For the sake of argument I agree’. But then you are worshipping only a small part of God - The tree - very small in the whole universe … speck.. That means in directly you are saying, ‘God is so small - Only in the tree, only in the snake’. So therefore if you have to worship - Worship the true God Almighty. Even though His knowledge is present everywhere, He is present everywhere - not in the physical form. Hope that answers the question.
Assalamualaikum – Dr. brother Zakir Naik - My question is regarding the form of ‘Allah’ -Surah No. 39, Zumar, Verse 67. The translation says… That ‘And on the day of resurrection, the whole of the earth will be grasped by His hand, and the heavens will be rolled up in His right hand’. There is also an Hadith in support of this ‘Sahih Al Bukhari, Volume 6, Hadith No. 336 - Can we just imagine some form of Allah?
(Dr. Zakir)

(Dr. Zakir) The sister has asked a question – that in Surah Al Zumar, it says .. it is correct, Qur’an does say, ‘that.. that on the day of Judgement, i.e Resurrection, Allah Subuhana Wa Taala will hold all the creation’ and there are various verses in the Qur’an, etc. But if you heard my talk sister, I gave you the keyword. The key… the key to this concept, is Surah As Shura Ch.42, Verse No. 11 which says …(Arabic)… ‘There is nothing whatever like Him’. So if Qur’an says, ‘Allah has hands’… people ask me that the Qur’an says, ‘Allah holds the sky’. What do you mean,… ‘Holds like that?’ If I say, ‘I am holding my family together’ - Do you mean to say 24 hours I am with my wife and my child?. I am not holding my wife and child always… yet I am holding them - But I am not holding them, like that - there are words used. And whenever as I said if Qur’an says – ‘Allah Sees and Hears’. He Hears - That means Allah has ears like us? He hears - How He hears?… Allah Ho Aalam… Allah knows. He has a hand - But not like yours and mine… five fingers with nail, and with this… not like that. He has hands - Yes, He has hands - How He has a hand? …(Arabic)… ‘There is nothing like Him’ How will He do it? - Allah Hu Aalam - He will do it for sure. Qur’an says He will hold it in the right hand - He will hold it in the right hand. How He will hold it? With five fingers, or six fingers, - I don’t know. On the day of Judgement… Inshallah, you and I will witness that.
(Q) (Dr. Muhammed) The next question from the slip - Assalamu Alaikum Br. Zakir.

As Muslims, we believe that Allah Subhana Wa Taala is ‘Noor’- We cannot attribute any form or gender to Him. Why then, when we speak of Almighty God, or as written in the Holy Qur’an - Allah is always refered to as… ‘ He’. The sister has asked a very good question and this question has troubled me for several years. And she asked the question – Allah is Noor, He has got no form, no gender - So why is it written as ‘Hua’… as ‘He’. And this question, I asked to various people… you know in India and other scholars - but never got a satisfactory reply. Then I myself did a little research and then I checked it up with the experts. That’s when I learned Arabic - The grammar… The Arabic grammar has got only two genders - Male and Female. English language, three genders – Male, Female, Neutar. So if you translate ‘Hua’ into English, it can translated as ‘he’ or as ‘it’ - Either ‘he’ or ‘it’ Same as ‘Heya’ -If you translate into English, it can be translated as ‘She’ or ‘It’. That’s Arabic language… - two genders - English language … 3 genders. So ‘Hua’ if you translate, you can translate as ‘He’ or ‘it. ‘Heya’ as ‘She’ or ‘it’. So ‘Hua’ in English, if you say – Allah Subhana Wa Taala is beyond any gender - So why have they used ‘He’. Some people may say that if ‘Hua’ means ‘He’ and ‘It’, and ‘Heya’ means ‘She’ and ‘It’ – both mean ‘It’. So why did Allah use ‘Hua’ and not ‘Heya’. Because Qur’an says …(Arabic)…‘Say He is Allah one and only’. When I learned in grammar… in Arabic grammer, I was told, that in the Arabic grammar, there are certain rules and criterias for feminine gender… feminine gender, 1st, if it is feminine in nature like ‘mother’… ‘Ummun’, it becomes a feminine gender. 2nd rule - if it ends with ‘Toh’. ‘Toh’, - it is feminine gender… like Mirvahatun –fan ending with ‘toh’ it becomes feminine gender. Allah Subhana Wa Taala is not a female… So it can’t be feminine - It is not ending with ‘Toh’. Is it ending with ‘Toh?’ - No! So can’t be feminine. 3rd is - it should end with ‘Bada Alif’… then it becomes feminine. Allah doesn’t end with ‘Bada Alif’… So it can’t become feminine. And another one - if the pairs of the body – ‘twos’ like eyes… einum feminine, ‘Yadun’… hand, feminine. Allah is …(Arabic)… Say He is Allah One and only. ‘It is not fair… so therefore is defection, in default... since it can’t be used as ‘Heya’… ‘It’, that she ‘It’ – Allah uses ‘Hua’ ‘It’. Otherwise Allah Subuhana Wa Taala has got no gender at all.

(Q) Assalamu Alaikum Brother – Brother, my name is Ali Hussain.
Now in your talk you have mentioned that… and even in your earlier talks which I have heard...you have mentioned that Jesus in Bible is no where claiming Divinity. I have gone through a booklet, which was propagating Christianity… and implying that all the sufferings are healed by Jesus (peace be upon him), and it gives the reference that Jesus is saying, ‘I am the Lord who heals you’ and the reference was from Exodus Ch.15, Verse No. 26. And even it went further, saying that in 1st John, Ch. 1 Verse No. 7… The blood of Jesus -cleanses us from all sins. Now my emphasis is on the 1st reference, where he it is saying, ‘who heals you’. Now doesn’t this imply, or doesn’t it indicate that Jesus is claiming Divinity? The brother is quoting Exodus, Ch.15, Verse 26, and is saying Jesus says… ‘that I heal you’. Brother, ‘Exodus’ is a part of the old Testament… Old Testament. Jesus Christ never spoke in ‘Exodus’ – Never I said in my talk – there is not a single unequivocal statement in the whole Bible where Jesus (peace be upon him), himself says that ‘he is God’ or ‘Worship me’. This is the Bible I have got by the Christians - King James Version. Every thing what Jesus Christ spoke, is in red - You check it up - This will never be in red. It is not the words of Jesus - It is word of somebody else. And even if I agree with you, for sake of argument, that Jesus did say … ‘that he heals’ And the Qur’an does agree with that - and I said in my talk, we believe that he gave life to the dead, with God’s permission. He healed those born deaf and blind with Gods Permission. So I have got no objection in agreeing that Jesus Christ (peace be upon him), did heal the people. Its our faith - Even we believe in it. But whatever he did, as the Bible says in the Gospel of Mathew, Ch.12, Verse No. 28... ‘He cast out devil by the Spirit of God. Gospel of Luke, Ch.11, Verse No.20 ‘With the finger of God, he cast out devil. He did everything which bore witness of the Father. So I have got no objection in agreeing, that Jesus did do miracles. But regarding Exodus, it is not the word of Jesus Christ (peace be upon him) Even if it is I have got no objection, because whatever miracles he did, Jesus Christ (peace be upon him), said that… ‘This is done by Allah Subuhana Wa Taala. And again Jesus Christ (peace be upon him ) said in the Gospel of Mathew, Ch24 Verse No. 24. ‘For there shall arise many false Christs, and false prophets… and if it is so possible, they shall deceive the very elect’ - Miracle is not the test . Jesus Christ (peace be upon him) said - Its mentioned in the Gospel of Mathew, Ch. No. 11, Verse No. 11… ‘Of those that are born of a woman, the greatest person is John the Baptist’ - those that are born of a woman - the greatest person is John the Baptist. That means, he was greater even than Jesus (peace be upon him)… because Jesus was born to Mother Mary. So ‘Amongst all born of a women, the greatest is John the Baptist’ according to Jesus (peace be upon him). Which miracle did he do? - Not a single. Therefore, miracle is not the criteria to make him God. Hope that answer a question.

(Dr. Muhammed) I am sorry, the management of the hall has requested that we would not be permitted to extend the programme further, due to limitations of time, and the next programme coming up. So though we appreciate - I have just one or two announcements. If you have any further question on the subject, or on Islam and Comparative Religion, you are most welcome to attend our lectures… followed by question and answer session, every Saturday at 3 p.m,. every Sunday at 10:30 a.m, and every Monday for ladies at 3:00 p.m. at the Islamic Research Foundation Auditorium. Our next major public talk on ‘Salaah – The programming towards righteousness’ by Dr. Zakir Naik, will Insha Allah be held on Sunday 7th December 1997, at 10:00 a.m. at Patkar Hall, Marine Lines, Mumbai. Let me once again remind you that besides the daily morning relay of IRF Programmes on Cable TV for 3 hours in Mumbai, the ATN Satellite TV channel, telecasts IRF programs on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays from 6:00 a.m. to 6:30 a.m - Indian Standard Time, across 68 countries of the world. We thank Allah Subhana Wa Taala for making this program possible. On behalf of the Islamic Research Foundation, I thank all our guests, including the Press for attending the Programme. We also appreciated and thank all the persons involved, in the organizing and recording of this event – Jazaku Mullah Khairan.
(Back Ground Azaan, By Brother Yusuf Islam)

Islamic Research Foundation An International Resource Centre For Understanding And Clarification, On Islam And Comparative Religion. Islamic Research Foundation Provides For Free Hire And Sale, Video And Audio Cassettes, On Islam And Comparative Religion. This Being, The Largest And Best Collection Internationally. It Includes Films, Television Programmes, Documentaries, Qur’anic And Islamic Studies Programmes As Well As Interviews, Lectures, Symposia, Debates, Etc., Of World Renowned Speakers Like Shaikh Ahmed Deedat - South Africa, Dr. Zakir Naik- India, Dr. Jamal Badawi - Canada, Dr. Khalid Al-Mansoor - U.S.A., Brother Yusuf Islam - U.K., Brother Gary Miller - Canada, Dr. Israr Ahmed -Pakistan, Maulana Abdul Karim Parekh- India, And Many Others. Islamic Research Foundation Also Provides On Request, Free Literature On Islam And Comparative Religion. Please Phone, Call, Or Write To Islamic Research Foundation, 56/58, Tandel Street (North), Dongri, Mumbai 400 009.
(Azan Continued….).
