Seerah of Prophet Muhammed 2 - Specialities of Prophet Muhammed Part 2
By Dr. Yasir Qadhi

Lecture Name: Seerah of Prophet Muhammed 2 - Specialities of Prophet Muhammed Part 2
Lecturer: Dr. Yasir Qadhi
Date: 4th May, 2011
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=udjM4dBVicE
Transcriber: brother Safwan Khan & Faizan
Transcriber Email: safwan-khan@hotmail.com
Transcript Source: https://arqadhi.blogspot.com/2015/11/002-specialties-of-prophet-muhammad-saw.html


The fact is there are 50 special qualities the prophet PBUH had but no one else did. We will begin by talking about his physical appearance and realize it is the sunnah of Allah that Allah sends prophets with the most perfect characteristics, inner and outer - so mankind has NO reason to reject the message and the person. Indeed every prophet was sent with the most beautiful characteristics and mannerisms. As we know, prophet yusuf was given half of all beauty. Some scholars say all of mankind's beauty (majority opinion) - but some said when the prophet PBUH said this he meant half of his OWN beauty - as he is the most handsome and beautiful of all.

We have many narrations that describe the physical characteristics. When a son asked an old lady after the prophet passed away "what was the prophet like". She said "oh my dear son, if you were to have seen him, you would have through the sun would have risen up". And it is amazing she described him as a son, and another the moon "his face would light up as did the full moon". One is saying he is like the sun,and another the full moon. This shows how the sahaba could NOT describe him.

There is a tradition that almost makes you want to cry - the tradition of Amr ibn al-As. He used to be the leader of quraysh (like Abu Suffyan) this category of people were noble enemies - the opposed Islam but not stuping to dirty tactics. And Allah reverted all of these people. And this shows because they had a good heart (khalid ibn waleed, Abu Suffyan, Ikrimah the son of Abu Jahal etc) - Allah guided all of them to Islam. So Amr ibn al-As only had an opportunity to be a sahabi for a few years. And later on in his life he would say "there was nothing that was more sweeter or beloved to me than to stare at the face of the prophet". The beauty and noor of the prophet was so great that he is saying "there is nothing sweeter than to simply look at the face" and YET "i could never got enough of looking at him". And YET "were you to ask me how he looked, I couldn't describe him. BECAUSE along with this desire to start at him, there was also this awe i had that couldn't allow him to stare at him and i had to straight away look down". So there was is both beauty and awe overpowering people around him. You have to show the upmost dignity. "Even though I loved to stare I couldn't stare". And he is a noble man of the quraysh and this is how humbled he was just by the prophets face SAW.




Most of the description of the prophet come from the youngest sahaba. Indeed they don't have the same type of emotions as the older sahaba. Anas ibn Malik was introduced to the prophet SAW at 7 years old - and he would serve him all day. And he said "the prophet SAW was neither very tall such that he stood above the crowd, nor short such that he would be ignored. And he was neither extremely white or ruddy brown". Generally speaking white = lightish brown in Arabic. So the prophet was a lightish skin colour of brown. The prophets hair "was not in curls nor was it straight".. and "i never felt any velvet or silk softer than the hand of the prophet nor did i smell any fragrance any sweeter than the smell of the prophets sweat". Indeed one sahabi used to collect his sweat in a jar to use it as medicine and perfume.

"The prophet was of medium stature and he had broad shoulders. His hair was thick - his beard was very bushy" and the prophet would grow it when it went down to his ear lobes.

His cousin Ali ibn Abi Talib said "the prophet did not have a very fleshy face nor was his face round, it was slightly overlish. He had a (light brown) skin. His eyes were large with jet black pupils. And his lashes was long. His joints was long as was his upper back - so broad shoulders." And he did not hair all over his body but he did have a fine line of hair extending from the chest to the naval. "When he walked he would walked fast - as if he is walking down a slope. Some scholars say its as if the earth was humbled when he waled. When he turned he would turn to face with his whole body. between his two shoulders was the seal of the prophet hood, and he was the seal of the prophets." The prophet had a physical seal on his body that Allah gave him. And this was to be a sign by which he would be recognized. It was a small growth of hair in between his shoulders (more later). Most famously, salman al farisi accepted Islam because of this seal because of this test of the seal. First day he checked the prophet and he had the sign. Second day - check. On the third day Salman looked for the seal. He walked behind the prophet and the prophet lowered his top as he knew what he wanted to see. And there and then salman accepted Islam. "Whoever unexpectedly saw him, would stand in awe of him" so much emanating from his body. "And whoever got to know him would love him. And those who described him will always say I have never seen anyone before him or after him that was like him".

Jaabir ibn samura: he was going home one day on a full moon, and just happens to pass by the prophet (PBUH) and he was wearing a red covering and he said "I looked at the face of the prophet and the full moon - and the prophet was more beautiful in my eyes than the full moon".

Many people accepted Islam just by seeing his face. The chief rabbi of the Jews of madina: Abdullah ibn salam. And he heard this man claiming to be a prophet - first day the prophet came to Madina. He wants to go and see the message. "As soon as i saw him, I knew that this face that he has cannot be the face of a liar". And one conversation he accepts Islam then and there. And this was the biggest jew rabbi in madina.

And he had so many internal qualities. Of these were patience, mercy, understanding, love and care. But also humility, modesty, simple lifestyle etc. Omar entered upon him when the prophet was lying in his small compartment in his masjid. And it was nothing but a jug of water and a small bed made out of the branches of a date palm tree. When Omar comes in he sits up to greet him. And because of the data palm branches there was a red mark dented into the back of the prophet. And thats when Omar starts crying (it was 7th, 8th year of the hijra - when the prophet is the leader of Arabia!). "Oh how can we allow you to live like this look at the people, the kings how they live - surely you deserve better?" Omar asked. Then the prophet got irritated and said "Omar aren't you happy that they have the world and we have the akhira?"

Aisha RA says "the bed the prophet used to sleep on was a leather skin that we would stuff with leaves to make it a little bit softer". Once it is narrated one of his wives folded it up her own half to make it more comfortable for the prophet and because of this the prophet slept for longer. When he woke up and realized what happened he said change it back as he didn't want this comfort as it prevented him from praying tahajjud.

And sometimes the prophet would not eat meat for 6 weeks! And Uruwa 40 years down the line asked Aisha RA "oh my mother how did you live?" She said "we lived by eating the two black things - dates and dirty water". And Subhan'Allah in his whole life there was not one day where the prophet ate bread, and not even wheat bread or hard bread, to his fullest. Not even one day. And he said "I worry Allah has allowed us to remain for such a long time that we're seeing all these blessings come and the prophet PBUH is getting something better". That is, he is worried he is getting reward now but wants it in the hereafter. And in many narrations Aisha RA also began to cry when good food was given to her - indeed she lived 40 years after the death of the prophet PBUH, when the money started flowing mA. And even though she was generous people would still gift her items and good food. And she would say the same thing that the prophet PBUH never ate rusty or even hard bread to his full.

Note that the sahaba lived tough times in Madinah. Before the money came in and Islam came to power, for months they lived very difficult lives. And so we know the story wherein one time Umar RA was walking on the streets and sees the prophet PBUH sitting. And this is at noon - a time when nobody walks on the street as its too hot.

And so he says to the prophet PBUH "what are you doing?". And the prophet PBUH knows Umar RA is outside for one reason - and that is he doesn't have food at home so he says "the same reason you are outside". That he doesn't have food at home. And as he sits Abu Bukr RA is also walking on the streets for the same reason. Now the three of them are sitting down all hungry and talking. One sahaba sees them and asks them what they are doing there. And Umar RA explains they are sitting outside out of hunger. So this sahaba tells them comes to my house and I will give you food. He has one goat and tells his wife, "By Allah we need to sacrifice this goat, and prepare meet and bread". So the three of them ate meat and bread but once they had finished, he reminded Abu Bukr and Umar RA, that they felt there houses hungry and Allah gave them this meal - "soma la tus alona yo maizin anin naeem" - you will be asked about this blessing Allah is giving you. Subhan'Allah. Take a lesson from this.

And as for his humility, the prophet PBUH frequently rode donkeys, even though he had a camel but the prophet had no problem riding a donkey. And during the battle of badr, the prophet had to distribute the camels amongst the people. There were ~315 people and ~75 camels. So roughly 3/4 per camel. And so the prophet shared with two other people, Ali and Abu lababa. Of course put yourself in their shoes. You would say to the prophet PBUH take it! And they said to him "we are young men in our 30s, we can walk and you take the camel". The prophet could have and should have said OK fine. And indeed the leader and commander DESERVES the camel - he deserves the extra protection, forget Islam. The commander is someone who isn't treated as a solider or the private. But he didn't want them to feel like he was doing them a favour by taking it. So the prophet smiled and said "neither are the two of you any stronger than me, and nor am I am in any lesser need of ajar and Allah's reward than you, so we are going to share". SubhanAllah. Even though it wasn't necessary at all.

Anas ibn Malik who lived up to 110+ at the time when average death rate is 30 or 28. And of course this was of the dua the prophet made. Indeed anas's mother gave anas to the prophet in servitude all in the hope the prophet would make dua for her son. And he did, saying may Allah make his life full of barakah, and his progeny long etc. It was said anas had so much wealth, and that whatever business he did was very fruitful. He has great great grandchildren that were so much he couldn't count them - all because of the prophets dua.

And indeed "in 10 years I was a servant to the prophet, not once did |I hear an "oof"" and oof is the lowest form of anger. And "not once did the prophet saw why did/didn't you do this?". This is the perfection of the manners of the prophet.

And his bravery: Ali ibn Abi Talib said "when the fighting would become severe, we would seek refuge around the prophet". And Anas ibn Malik said "once in Madinah in the people of the night they heard a loud commotion so they came out very scared walking slowly. and they found the prophet had already got out in the direction and he found the house of abu Talha and he rode the horse back without a saddle" this shows manliness "and he is galloping coming back saying "you have nothing to fear I have checked it out"". He was the FIRST person to run out to a horse without a saddle.

Generosity: he would NEVER refuse any asking of him. Ever. This is why "it was possible for any little girl to go the hand of the prophet for help". And its narrated the prophet was wearing a garment that had holes in it and one of the sahaba gave him a very beautiful garment. And he wore this garment. And then another sahaba asked him "can you give me this as a gift?" and immediately the prophet said yes. This is the very garment he just got as a gift! He went back home and came back wearing the tattered garment. All of the sahaba jumped on this other sahaba... "you knew that he would never say no". And he said "I am doing this for my kuffin".

And the prophet was blessed with a great sense of humour - and this shows your humanity. And there are so many instances of the jokes. All of the jokes are pure clean and truthful. Even his jokes. One was an old lady came to the prophet "oh messenger make dua Allah makes me to go to jannah". And the prophet looked at her and said "oh my aunt haven't you been informed that old ladies cannot enter jannah" and she began to wail and cry. And he said "don't cry, old ladies cant enter, but Allah will first make you into a young, fair maiden and then you will enter Jannah". That is, you're going to be young and beautiful when you enter jannah - it was a joke. Quran says "we bring them forth with a new beginning".

And the story of Aisha when the prophet was on his death bed: and it so happened Aisha felt a little sick and she had a severe headache and she was crying "oh my head oh my head" and the prophet said "rather oh my head" and to calm her down (and he knew he is about to die) so to crack some jokes: "and what would you lose if you died right now; the one to do gusl and pray your janazah would be me". And so Aisha says "I am sure you would like that to happen because then you would be free to go to your other wives". SubhanAllah he is joking on his death bed. And from this joke scholars derived fiqh.

And: there was a young man by the name of Zahir whom the prophet used to love a lot. And we don't know hardly anything about him but here was something about him that the prophet loved him. he was a sincere believer. once the prophet saw him in the market selling some things "who is going to buy this from me etc" and so the prophet came from behind quietly and he grabbed him from behind and gave him a bear lock and when Zahir saw it was the prophet he leant back trying to get barawah. and then as a joke the prophet shouted out "who is going to buy this abd from me?" where abd = slave of Allah. again he isn't lying in this joke. so Zahir said "in that case you will be get a very bad baragin".. and the prophet said "you are very expensive in the eyes of Allah".

And as with the love of his ummah: the prophet had an immense amount of love for his own ummah. And Allah says "there has come to you a messenger from among you, he finds it difficult to bear your hardships, he is ever eager for you, to the believers he is full of compassion and mercy."

Nuh after making dawah for 950 years he said "oh Allah i don't want you to leave one house on kaffir on this house" and only Nuh and this three daughters survived. And Ibrahim made the dua "oh Allah send from amongst me a rasul" and this is why the prophet said "I am the dua of my father Ibrahim". And Musa made dua against Firaun. Because Firaun was a mass murderer, claimed to be God etc. And indeed this is what happened. Soloman made the dua "give me a dominion (control) that you have given to no other human before" so Allah gave him powers NO ONE had. Indeed "we made of him the wind etc." Soloman would sit on a carpet across the world and bring him back in one night. And he had control over the shaitan and jinn. They were building and diving and bringing treasures - all control of the jinns to soloman. And he could speak to animals and even ants! So all the animals became his servants. This is the dua of Soloman.

And our prophet had the biggest and greatest dua. The one dua. And he used it for: "every single rasul and nabi Allah has given one dua and every one has used it up in this world, except for me. I have saved it for my ummah and will use it on them on the DOJ." oh Allah forgive my ummah! And Allah will except this dua in that every single Muslim who believes and acts upon even a little bit of his teachings EVENTUALLY will be forgiven and enter Jannah. All because the prophet saved the one dua for us. And there can be no greater sacrifice than this.

Anas ibn Malik narrates: a man came to the prophet and said "when is the DOJ?". And the prophet of course doesn't know but asked "what have you prepared for it when it comes?" and so, the man was silent for a while. And he said "I really don't have that much salad, fasting or sadaqah but I have a genuine love for Allah and his messenger". And the prophet PBUH then said "the man will be with he who he loves ". And Anas said we were never happy on a day except for this day when we heard you can be with who you love because we love the prophet PBUH and want to be with him, but we thought our levels would be so different - but this hadith made us so happy.

And so let us have a genuine love for him iA. And let us study his life so we can follow him.
